the project gutenberg ebook  the bobbsey twins on blueberry island  by
laura lee hope


this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or
re use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www gutenberg org





title  the bobbsey twins on blueberry island


author  laura lee hope



release date  january 7  2007   ebook  20311 

language  english

character set encoding  iso 646 us  us ascii 


   start of the project gutenberg ebook the bobbsey twins on blueberry
island   


e text prepared by marilynda fraser cunliffe  j  p  w  fraser  emmy  and
the project gutenberg online distributed proofreading team
 http   www pgdp net c  



note  project gutenberg also has an html version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations 
      see 20311 h htm or 20311 h zip 
       http   www gutenberg net dirs 2 0 3 1 20311 20311 h 20311 h htm 
      or
       http   www gutenberg net dirs 2 0 3 1 20311 20311 h zip 





the bobbsey twins on blueberry island

by

laura lee hope

          author of  the bobbsey twins    the bunny
          brown series    the outdoor girls
          series   etc 

illustrated







new york
grosset   dunlap
publishers
made in the united states of america


                                        


books by laura lee hope


the bobbsey twins series

          the bobbsey twins
          the bobbsey twins in the country
          the bobbsey twins at the seashore
          the bobbsey twins at school
          the bobbsey twins at snow lodge
          the bobbsey twins on a houseboat
          the bobbsey twins at meadow brook
          the bobbsey twins at home
          the bobbsey twins in a great city
          the bobbsey twins on blueberry island


the bunny brown series

          bunny brown and his sister sue
          bunny brown and his sister sue on grandpa s farm
          bunny brown and his sister sue playing circus
          bunny brown and his sister sue at aunt lu s city home
          bunny brown and his sister sue at camp rest a while
          bunny brown and his sister sue in the big woods
          bunny brown and his sister sue on an auto tour


the outdoor girls series

          the outdoor girls of deepdale
          the outdoor girls at rainbow lake
          the outdoor girls in a motor car
          the outdoor girls in a winter camp
          the outdoor girls in florida
          the outdoor girls at ocean view
          the outdoor girls on pine island


                                        


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york 
copyright  1917  by
grosset   dunlap 




the bobbsey twins on blueberry island


 illustration  freddie caught the first fish 

 the bobbsey twins on blueberry island    frontispiece     page 123   




contents


          chapter                                         page

              i  the gypsies                    1
             ii  a surprise                    13
            iii  worried twins                 26
             iv  the goat                      36
              v  a bumpy ride                  47
             vi  jolly news                    59
            vii   where is snap                68
           viii  off to camp                   78
             ix  a night scare                 90
              x  the  go around  bugs         103
             xi  the blueberry boy            112
            xii  the drifting boat            126
           xiii  in the cave                  137
            xiv  helen s visit                147
             xv  the doll s dress             161
            xvi  snoop is missing             170
           xvii  freddie is caught            179
          xviii  flossie is tangled           191
            xix  the twins fall down          202
             xx  the queer noise              213
            xxi   here comes snap             221
           xxii  happy days                   231




the bobbsey twins on blueberry island


chapter i

the gypsies


 oh  dear  i wish we weren t going home  

 so do i  can t we stay out a little while longer  

 why  flossie and freddie bobbsey   cried nan  the older sister of the
two small twins who had spoken   a few minutes ago you were in a hurry
to get home  

 yes  they said they were so hungry they couldn t wait to see what dinah
was going to have for supper   said bert bobbsey   how about that 
freddie  

 well  i m hungry yet   said the little boy  who was sitting beside his
sister flossie in a boat that was being rowed over the blue waters of
lake metoka   i am hungry  and i want some of dinah s pie  but i d like
to stay out longer  

 so would i   added flossie   it s so nice on the lake  and maybe
to morrow it will rain  

 well  what if it does   asked nan   you didn t expect to come out on
the lake again to morrow  did you  

 maybe   answered flossie  as she smoothed out the dress of a doll she
was holding in her lap 

 i d like to come out on the lake and have a picnic every day   said
freddie  leaning over the edge of the boat to see if a small ship  to
which he had fastened a string  was being pulled safely along 

 don t do that   cried nan quickly   do you want to fall in  

 no   answered freddie slowly  as though he had been thinking that
perhaps a wetting in the lake might not be so bad after all   no  i
don t want to fall in now   cause whenever i go in swimming i get
terrible hungry  and i don t want to be any hungrier than i am now  

 oh  so that s the only reason  is it   asked bert with a laugh   well 
just keep inside the boat until we get on shore  and then you can fall
out if you want to  

 how am i going to fall out when the boat s on shore   asked freddie 
 boats can t go on land anyhow  bert bobbsey  

 that will be something for you to think about  and then maybe you won t
lean over and scare nan   said bert  smiling 

 do you want i should land you at your father s lumber dock  or shall i
row on down near the house  bert   asked a man who was pulling at the
oars of the boat   it won t make any difference to me  i ve got lots of
time  

 then  jack  row us down near the house  if you don t mind   begged nan 
 i want to get these two fat twins ashore as soon as i can  freddie
especially  if he s going to almost fall overboard when i m not
looking  

 i m not going to fall overboard   cried the little fat fellow   can t i
row  jack  

 not now  freddie  i m in a hurry   answered the man  one of the workers
from mr  bobbsey s lumberyard 

 but you told bert  just now  that you had lots of time   insisted
freddie 

 well  er  ahem  i haven t time to let you row  freddie  maybe i will
some other day   and jack looked at bert and smiled  while he said to
himself   you ve got to get up early in the morning to match a smart
chap like him   meaning freddie  of course 

a short time before  the bobbsey twins had returned from the city of new
york where they had spent a part of the winter  now it was spring and
would soon be summer  and  as the day was a fine  warm one  they had
gone on a little picnic  taking their lunch with them and pretending to
camp on one of the many islands in the lake  now they were on their way
home 

 well  here you are  safe on shore   announced jack  as the twins called
mr  henderson  the man whom their father had sent with them to manage
the boat 

 yes  and there goes freddie  falling overboard   cried bert with a
laugh  as his little fat brother stumbled over a coil of rope on the
dock and tumbled down   it s a good thing you didn t do that in the
boat  little fat fireman  

 i didn t hurt myself  anyhow   said freddie  as he got up   come on 
flossie  let s run home  i m terrible hungry  

 so m i   added his sister  who was as fat as he  and just the same
size  the two smaller bobbsey twins started on ahead  while bert  after
seeing that the boat was well tied  followed on more slowly with his
sister nan 

 it was a nice ride we had   nan said   wasn t it  bert  

 yes  it s great out on the lake  i wonder if we ll ever go camping as
we talked of when we were in new york  

 maybe  let s tease mother to let us  

 all right  you ask her and i ll ask father  there s one island in the
lake where     

but bert did not have a chance to finish what he was going to say  for
just then flossie and freddie  who had hurried on ahead  came running
back  surprise showing on their faces 

 oh  bert   cried freddie   it s here  it s come  

 can we go to see it   added flossie   oh  i just want to  

 what s here  what do you want to see  what is it   asked bert and nan
together  taking turns at the questions 

 the circus is here   answered freddie 

 circus   asked bert in surprise 

 yep  we saw the wagons   went on flossie   they re all red and yellow 
and they ve got lookin  glasses all over the sides  and they have rumbly
wheels  like thunder  and horses with bells on and  and     

 you d better save a little of your breath to eat some of the good
things you think dinah is going to cook for you   said nan with a laugh 
as she put her arms around her small sister   now what is it all about  

 it s a circus   cried freddie 

 we saw the wagons going along the street where our house is   added
flossie   all red and yellow and     oh  look   she suddenly cried 
 there they are now  

she pointed excitedly down the side street  on which the bobbsey twins
then were  toward the main street of lakeport  where the bobbsey family
lived  nan and bert  as well as flossie and freddie  saw three or four
big wagons  gaily painted red and yellow  and with glittering pieces of
looking glass on their sides  the prancing horses drawing the wagons had
bells around their necks and a merry  tinkling jingle sounded  making
music wherever the horses went 

bert and nan gave one look at the wagons  and then they both laughed 
flossie and freddie glanced up in surprise at their older brother and
sister 

 look what they thought was a circus   chuckled bert 

 isn t it   asked flossie   isn t that a circus  

 no  dear   answered nan   don t laugh so much   she said to bert  as
she saw that the two small twins felt hurt   they do look something like
circus wagons  

 they  are  circus wagons   declared freddie   and pretty soon the
elephants will come past  i like elephants  

 you won t see any elephants to day   said bert   that isn t a circus
procession  

 what is it   flossie demanded 

 those are gypsy wagons   explained nan   gypsies  you know  are those
queer people  who are dark skinned  they wear rings in their ears and
live in wagons like those  they ride all over the country and tell
fortunes  i wanted to have my fortune told by a gypsy once  but mother
wouldn t let me   she added 

 it s silly   declared bert   just as if a gypsy could tell you what s
going to happen  

 well  lillie kent had hers told   went on nan   and the gypsy looked at
her hand and said she was going to have trouble  and she did  

 what   asked flossie eagerly 

 she lost a nickel a week after that  a nickel she was going to buy a
lead pencil with  

 pooh   laughed bert   she d have lost the nickel anyhow  but say  there
are lots of gypsies in this band  i ve counted five wagons so far  

 maybe they re going to have a circus   insisted freddie  who did not
like to give up the idea of seeing a show 

 course they re going to have a circus   said flossie   look at all the
horses   for behind the last two wagons were trotting a number of
horses  being led along by men seated in the ends of the bright colored
wagons  the men had straps which were fastened to the heads of the
animals 

 no  gypsies don t give shows  they buy and sell horses   said bert 
 i ve seen  em here in lakeport before  but not so many as this  i guess
they re going to make a camp somewhere on lake metoka  

 maybe we ll see  em when we go camping   said freddie 

 it isn t yet sure that we re going   returned nan   but  come on  there
are no more gypsy wagons to see  and we must get home  

flossie and freddie  somewhat disappointed that  after all  it was not a
circus procession they had seen  started off again  they wished they
could have seen more of the gypsies  but the gay wagons rumbled on out
of sight  though this was not the last the bobbsey twins were to see of
them  in fact  they were to meet the gypsies again  and to have quite an
adventure with them before the summer was over 

 well  we had a good time  anyhow   said freddie to flossie   and we
 almost  saw a circus  didn t we  

 yep   answered his sister   i m going to be a gypsy when i grow up  

 why   asked freddie 


  cause they ve got so many looking glasses on their wagons  

 i m going to be a gypsy  too   decided freddie  after thinking it over
a bit    cause they ve got so many horses  i m going to ride horseback 
and you can ride in one of the wagons  flossie  

 no  i m going to ride horseback  too   declared the little girl   i m
going to have a spangly thing in my hair and wear a dress all glittery
and stand on the horse s back and ride     

 gypsies don t do that   protested bert   it s the people in circuses
that ride standing up  

 gypsies do too   declared freddie  not knowing a thing about it but
feeling he must back up anything flossie said 

 no  they don t  either  

 well  maybe they have gypsies in a circus  they have indians  you
know  

 i don t believe they do   put in nan   gypsies wouldn t like to be in a
tent and work every afternoon and every evening  they want to live in
their wagons and be more out of doors  

 well  maybe we ll be gypsies and maybe we ll be in a circus   said
freddie   we ll see  won t we  flossie  

 yep  

by this time the bobbsey twins had reached their house  or rather  they
had turned the corner of the street leading out from the lake  and were
in sight of their home  what they saw caused bert  nan  flossie and
freddie to set out on a run  in front of their house was a crowd of
people  there were men  women and children  and among them the twins
could see their mother  fat dinah  the cook  and sam johnson  her
husband  who attended to the bobbsey furnace in winter and the lawn in
summer 

 what s the matter   asked nan 

 something has happened   cried bert 

 the house is on fire   shouted freddie   i must get my fire engine that
squirts real water   and he raced on ahead 

 wait a minute   called bert 

the bobbsey twins saw their mother coming quickly toward them  she held
out her arms and cried 

 oh  i m so glad you re safe  

 why  what s the matter   asked flossie 

 i can t just say   answered her mother   but helen porter can t be
found  her mother has looked everywhere for her  but can t find her  

 she s been carried off by the gypsies   exclaimed john marsh  an
excited boy about bert s age   the gypsies took her  i saw  em  

 you did   asked bert 

 sure i did  a man  dark  with a red sash on  and gold rings in his
ears  he picked helen up in his arms and went off with her  she s in one
of the gypsy wagons now  

when john told this flossie and freddie huddled closer to their mother 




chapter ii

a surprise


 what s all this  what s the matter   asked a voice on the outside
fringe of the crowd that had gathered in front of the bobbsey home  and 
looking up  bert saw his father coming down the street from the
direction of his lumberyard   has anything happened   asked mr  bobbsey 
after a glance had shown him that his own little family was safe and
sound 

 dere suah has lots done gone an  happened  mistah bobbsey   answered
fat dinah   oh  de pore honey lamb  jest t  think ob it  

 but who is it  what has happened   asked mr  bobbsey  looking about for
some one to answer him  flossie and freddie decided they would do this 

 it s gypsies   said the little  fat fireman   as his father sometimes
called freddie 

 and they carried off helen porter   added the little  fat fairy   which
was flossie s pet name   an  i saw the wagons  all lookin  glasses  an 
freddie an  i are goin  to be gypsies when we grow up   flossie was so
excited that she dropped a lot of  g  letters from the ends of words
where they belonged 

 you don t mean to say that the gypsies have carried off helen
porter  the little girl who lives next door   asked mr  bobbsey in great
surprise 

 yep  they did  i saw  em   exclaimed john marsh   she had curly hair 
and when the gypsy man tooked her in his arms she cried  helen did  

 oh   exclaimed flossie  freddie and other children in the crowd 

 there must be some mistake   said mr  bobbsey   those gypsies would
never take away a child  even in fun  in broad daylight  it must be a
mistake  let me hear more about it  

and while the father of the bobbsey twins is trying to find out just
what had happened  i will take a few minutes to let my readers know
something of the twins themselves  for this book is about them 

it may be that some boy or girl is reading this as his or her first
venture into the volumes of the  bobbsey twins series   if so  i will
state that there are a number of books which come before this  though
this story is complete in itself 

to begin with there were four bobbsey twins  as you have guessed before
this  nan and bert were about ten years old  tall and dark  with eyes
and hair to match 

flossie and freddie were short and fat  and had light hair and blue
eyes  so  now that you know them you will have no trouble in telling the
twins  one from the other 

with their mother and their father  who owned a large lumberyard  the
twins lived in the eastern city of lakeport near the head of lake
metoka  there were others in the family besides the twins and their
parents  there was dear old  black  fat dinah  the cook  who made such
good pies  and there was sam  her husband  and i must not forget snoop 
the black cat  nor snap  the big dog  who once did tricks in a circus 
you will hear more about them later 

 the bobbsey twins   is the name of the first book  and in that you may
read of many adventures that befell the children  they had more
adventures in the country  and there is a book telling all about that
happy time  and also one about the seashore 

when the bobbsey twins went to school there was more fun and excitement
 than you could shake a stick at   as dinah used to say  though why any
one would want to shake a stick at fun i can t tell  then came jolly
times at  snow lodge   and on a houseboat  from there the twins went to
 meadow brook   and afterward came home  there to have more fun 

the book just before this one you are reading is called  the bobbsey
twins in a great city   in that you may learn how bert  nan  flossie and
freddie went to new york where mr  bobbsey had some business to look
after  while there the twins helped to solve a mystery about a poor old
man  i think  however  that i had better not tell you any more about it 
but let you read it for yourself 

and now we find the twins back in lakeport  ready for a good time during
the summer that would soon be at hand  only the gypsy scare had rather
alarmed every one for the time being 

 but now let me hear what it is all about   said mr  bobbsey  who had
come home from the office of his lumberyard to find an excited crowd in
front of his house   were there really any gypsies   he asked his wife 
 and did they take away helen porter  

 i don t know about that last part   said mrs  bobbsey   but a caravan
of gypsies did pass by the house a little while ago  i heard dinah say
something about the gaily painted wagons  and i looked out in time to
see them rumbling along the street  then  a little later  i heard mrs 
porter calling for helen  and  on seeing the crowd  i ran out  i was
worried about our children until i saw them coming from the lake  where
they had gone for a row in the boat  

 i can t believe that gypsies took helen   said mr  bobbsey 

 oh  but she s  gone    several neighbors told him   we can t find her
 anywhere   and her mother is crying and taking on terribly  

 well  it may be that helen is lost  or has even strayed away after the
gypsies  thinking their wagons were part of a circus  as nan says
flossie thought   said mr  bobbsey   but gypsies wouldn t dare take a
little girl away in broad daylight  

as he said this he looked at his own little children and at others in
the crowd  for he did not want them to be frightened 

 years ago  maybe  gypsies did take little folks   he said   but they
don t do it any more  i m sure  

 but where is helen   asked john marsh   a gypsy man has her  i know 
 cause i saw him take her  

 are you sure   asked mr  bobbsey  for john was an excitable boy 
sometimes given to imagining things that never happened 

 course i m sure   he said   cross my heart   and he did so  while the
other children looked on wonderingly 

 suppose you go over to mrs  porter s house   said mrs  bobbsey to the
children s father   she s worried  i guess  and her husband isn t home
yet  maybe you can help her  i was just going in when you came along  

 all right  i ll go   said mr  bobbsey 

 can t we come   asked freddie  and as he had hold of his little
sister s hand  it was flossie  of course  whom he included in his
question 

 no  you must go with your mother   said his father  and when the little
fat fireman seemed disappointed mr  bobbsey went on   i guess supper is
almost ready  isn t it  dinah  

 deed it am  an  dere s puddin  wif shaved up maple sugar scattered ober
de top an      

 oh  i want some of  that    cried flossie   come on  freddie  we can
look for the gypsies after supper  

 and we ll get helen out of the shiny wagons   added freddie  as he
hurried toward the bobbsey home with flossie  fat dinah waddling along
after them 

 i ll go with you   offered bert to his father   maybe you would want me
to go on an errand  

 yes  take bert with you   said mrs  bobbsey   i ll look after nan 
flossie and freddie  and be sure to tell mrs  porter that if i can do
anything for her i will  

 i ll tell her   and then mr  bobbsey  with bert  walked to the porter
house next door 

the crowd in the street grew larger  and there was much talk about the
gypsies  some said that several little boys and girls had been carried
off  but  of course  this was not so 

as flossie and freddie tore on toward the house in front of fat dinah 
they continued to chatter about the gypsies 

 if gypsies take little girls we don t want to be them  the gypsies  i
mean  freddie  

 humph umph  that s so  well  i guess we ll be in a circus anyhow 
that ll be more fun  you can ride a horse in the ring  and sometimes i
can ride with you and sometimes i can be a clown  when i m a clown i can
squirt water from my fire engine over the other clowns  that ll make the
folks holler and laugh  

when nan and mrs  bobbsey reached the house each of the little twins was
munching on a piece of maple sugar  given them by dinah to keep them
from nibbling at the pudding before the time to serve it came 

 my  momsie  aren t you glad the gypsies came and got helen porter  it
gives us something to think about   remarked freddie coolly 

 freddie bobbsey   gasped his mother   no  i am not glad the gypsies got
helen  if they did  and you and flossie find enough to think about  as
it is  and give the rest of us enough to think about  what is more  

 there go daddy and bert into mrs  porter s house now   said nan 

 now tell me just what happened  and i ll do all i can to help you  
said mr  bobbsey to mrs  porter  when he got to her house and found her
half crying in the sitting room where there were a number of other
women 

 oh  helen is gone  i m sure she is   cried the mother   the gypsies
have taken her  i ll never see her again  

 oh  yes you will   said mr  bobbsey in mild tones   i m sure it s all a
mistake  the gypsies haven t taken her at all  what makes you think
so  

 johnnie marsh saw them carry her away  

 then let s have johnnie in here where we can talk to him  bert  suppose
you do one of those errands you spoke of   said his father with a smile 
 and bring johnnie in out of the crowd where i can talk to him quietly  

john  or johnnie  as he was often called  was very ready to come when
bert found him outside the porter house  telling over and over again to
a crowd of boys what he had seen  or what he thought he had seen 

 now tell us just what happened   said mr  bobbsey  when the small boy
was seated in a chair in the porter parlor 

 well  i was coming from the store for my mother   said johnnie   and i
saw the gypsy wagons  i thought it was a circus  

 that s what flossie and freddie thought   said bert to his father 

 but it wasn t   went on johnnie   then i saw helen playing in grace
lavine s yard down the street when i came past  and a little while after
that  when i had to go to the store for my mother again   cause i forgot
a yeast cake  i saw a gypsy man running along the street and he had
helen in his arms and she was crying  

 what made you think it was helen   asked mr  bobbsey 

  cause i saw her light hair  helen s got fluffy hair like your
flossie s  

 yes  i know she has   said mr  bobbsey   what did you do when you
thought you saw the gypsy man carrying helen away   and they all waited
anxiously for johnnie s answer 

 i ran home   said johnnie   i didn t want to be carried off in one of
those looking glass wagons  

 quite right   said mr  bobbsey   then you really didn t see the gypsy
man pick helen up in his arms  

 no   slowly answered the little boy   he only just ran past me  but he
must have picked her up in grace s yard  for that s where helen was
playing  

 then we d better go down to where grace lavine lives and see what she
can tell us   said mr  bobbsey 

 you don t need to   put in bert   i see grace out in front now with
some other girls  shall i call her in  

 oh  please do   exclaimed mrs  porter   my poor helen  oh  what has
happened to her  

 we ll get your little girl back  even if the gypsies have her   said
mr  bobbsey   but i don t believe they have taken her away  call in
grace  bert  

grace was not as excited as johnnie  and told what she knew 

 helen and mary benson and i were playing in my yard   said grace   we
had our dolls and were having a tea party  mary and i went into the
house to get some sugar cookies  to play they were strawberry shortcake 
and we left helen out under the trees with her doll  when we came back
she wasn t there  nor her doll either  and down the street we saw the
gypsy wagons  

 did you see any gypsy man come into the yard and get helen   asked mr 
bobbsey 

 no   said grace  shaking her head   i didn t  but the gypsies must have
taken her   cause she was gone  

 oh  please some one go after the gypsies  and make a search among them 
at any rate   cried mrs  porter 

 we ll get right after them   said mr  bobbsey   i don t really believe
the gypsies took helen  but they may have seen her  they can t have gone
on very far  i ll call some policemen and we ll get after them  

 i ll come with you   said bert   maybe we d better get an automobile  

 it would be a good idea   said his father   let me see now  i
think     

but before mr  bobbsey could say what he thought there was the sound of
shouts in the street  and when those in the porter home rushed to the
windows and doors they were surprised to see  coming up the front walk 
the missing little girl herself 

there was helen porter  not carried off by the gypsies at all  but safe
at home  though something had happened  that was sure  for she was
crying 

 here she is  here she is   cried several in the crowd  and mrs  porter
rushed out to hug her little girl close in her arms 




chapter iii

worried twins


 oh  helen  how glad i am to have you back   cried mrs  porter   how did
you get away from the gypsies  or did they really have you  

the little girl stopped crying  and all about her the men  women and
children waited anxiously to hear what she would say 

 did the gypsies take you away   asked mr  bobbsey 

 no  the gypsies didn t get me   said helen  her voice now and then
broken by sobs   but they took mollie  

 took mollie   cried mr  bobbsey   do you mean to say they really did
take a little girl away  

 they  they took mollie   half sobbed helen   and i  i tried to get her
back  but i couldn t run fast enough and  and     

 well  if they really have mollie   went on mr  bobbsey   we must get
right after them and     

 mollie is the name of helen s big doll  almost as large as she is  
explained mrs  porter  who was now smiling through her tears   mollie
isn t a little girl  though probably there are several in lakeport named
that  but the mollie whom helen means is a doll  

 oh  i see   said mr  bobbsey   but did the gypsies really take your
doll  helen  

 yes  they did   answered the little girl   a bad gypsy man took her
away  i was playing with mollie in grace lavine s yard  and grace and
mary went into the house to get some cookies  i stayed out in the yard
with my doll   cause i wanted her to get tanned nice and brown  i laid
her down in a sunny place  and i went over under a tree to set the tea
table  and when i looked around i saw the gypsy man  

 where was he   asked mr  bobbsey 

 he was just getting out of one of the red wagons  and there was a
little gypsy girl in the wagon  she was pointing to my doll  and then
the man jumped down off the wagon steps  ran into the yard  picked up my
doll  and then he jumped into the wagon again and rode away  and he s
got my nice doll mollie  and i want her back  and  oh  dear   and helen
began to cry again 

 never mind   said mr  bobbsey quietly   i ll try to get your doll back
again  how large was it  

 nearly as large as helen herself   said mrs  porter   i didn t want her
to play with it to day but she took it  

 yes  but now the gypsy man with rings in his ears  he took it  
explained helen   he carried my doll off in his arms  

 then it must have been the doll which johnnie saw the gypsy man
carrying  and not helen   exclaimed bert   did it look like a doll 
johnnie  

 well  it might have been  it had light hair like helen s  though  

 helen s doll had light hair   said mrs  porter   and probably if a
gypsy put the doll under his arm  and ran past any one it would look as
though he were carrying off a little girl  especially as the doll
really had on a dress helen used to wear when she was a baby  

 that is probably what happened   said mr  bobbsey   the gypsy man s
little girl saw  from the wagon  the doll lying in the lavine yard 
gypsies are not as careful about taking what does not belong to them as
they might be  they often steal things  i m afraid  and  seeing the big
doll lying under the tree     

 where i put her so she d get tanned nice and brown   interrupted helen 

 just so   agreed mr  bobbsey   seeing the doll under the tree  with no
one near  the gypsy man made up his mind to take her for his little
girl  this he did  and when he ran off with mollie  johnnie saw what
happened and thought helen was being kidnapped 

 but i m glad that wasn t so  though it s too bad mollie has been taken
away  however  we ll try to get her back for you  helen  maybe the
gypsies took other things  if they did we ll send the police after them 
now don t cry any more and i ll see what i can do  

 and will you get mollie back  

 i ll do my best   promised the bobbsey twins  father 

there being nothing more he could do just then at the porter home  mr 
bobbsey went back to his own family  and told his wife  flossie  freddie
and nan what had happened 

 oh  i m so glad helen is all right   said mrs  bobbsey 

 but it s too bad about her doll   sighed nan  she had a doll of her
own  a fine one  and she knew how she would feel if that had been taken 

 helen s doll could talk   said flossie   i know   cause she let me make
it talk one day  you wind up a winder thing in her back  and then you
push on a shoe button thing in her front and she says  mamma  and  papa 
and other things  

 yes  that s right   said nan   mollie is a talking doll  i guess she
has a little phonograph inside her  maybe that s the noise johnnie heard
when the gypsy man carried the doll past him  and johnnie thought it was
helen crying  

 i guess that was it   agreed mr  bobbsey 

 well  it s too bad to lose a big talking doll  i must see what i can do
to help get it back  i ll call up the chief of police  

 it would be worse to lose your toy fire engine   declared freddie 

 why  freddie bobbsey   exclaimed his little sister   nothing could be
worse than to lose your very best doll  your very own child  

mr  bobbsey  being one of the most prominent business men in the town 
had considerable business at times with the police and the fire
departments  and the officers would do almost anything to help him or
his friends 

so  after supper  at which dinah had served the pudding with the
shaved up maple sugar over the top  flossie and freddie each having had
two helpings  mr  bobbsey called up the police station and asked if
anything more had been heard of the gypsies 

 well  yes  we did hear something of them   answered chief branford 
over the telephone wire   they ve gone into camp  where they always do 
on the western shore of the lake  and as i ve had several reports of
small things having been stolen around town  i m going to send on
officer out there to the gypsy camp  and have him see what he can find 
you say they took your little girl s doll  

 no  not my little girl s   answered mr  bobbsey   but the talking doll
belonging to a friend of hers  

 her name is molly  daddy   said flossie  who  with the other bobbsey
twins  was listening to her father talk over the telephone   i mean the
doll s name is mollie  not helen s name  

 i understand   said mr  bobbsey with a laugh  and he told the chief the
name of the doll and also the name of the little girl who owned it 

 well  what is to be done   asked mrs  bobbsey  as her husband hung up
the receiver 

 i think i ll go with the policeman and see what i can find out about
the gypsies   said mr  bobbsey   if they are going to take things that
do not belong to them they may pay a visit to my lumberyard  if they
have not done so already  i think i ll go out to the gypsy camp  

 oh  let me come   begged bert  always ready for an adventure 

 i wouldn t go  not at night  anyhow   remarked nan 

 nor i   added freddie  while flossie crept up into her mother s lap 

 oh  i m not going until morning   said mr  bobbsey   then i ll take
you  bert  if you d like to go  we ll see if we can find helen s big 
talking doll  

 she must feel bad at losing it   said nan 

 she does   said bert   though how any one can get to like a doll  with
such stupid eyes as they have  i can t see  

 they re as good as nasty old knives that cut you  and kite strings that
are always getting tangled   said nan with a laugh 

 yes  i guess we like different things   agreed her brother   well  i m
glad it wasn t flossie or freddie the gypsies took away with them  

 i wouldn t go   declared freddie   and if they took flossie  i d get my
fire engine and squirt water on those men with rings in their ears till
they let my sister go  

 that s my little fat fireman   laughed mr  bobbsey   but now i think
you re getting sleepy  your row on the lake made the sandman come
around earlier than usual i guess  off to bed with you  

flossie and freddie went to bed earlier than nan and bert  who were
allowed to sit up a little later  there was much talk about the gypsies 
and what they might have taken  and nan and bert were getting ready for
bed when a pattering of bare feet was heard on the stairs  and a voice
called 

 where s snoop  

 why  it s flossie and freddie   cried mrs  bobbsey  as she saw the two
small twins   why are you out of bed   she asked 

 freddie thought maybe the gypsies would take our cat snoop   explained
flossie   so we got up to tell you to bring him in  

 and bring in snap  our dog   added freddie   the gypsies might take
him   cause he does tricks and was once in a circus  

 oh  don t worry about that   laughed mr  bobbsey   get back to bed
before you take cold  

 but you won t let the gypsies take them  will you   asked flossie
anxiously 

 no  indeed   promised her mother   snoop is safely curled up in his
basket  and i guess snap wouldn t let a gypsy come near him  

but flossie and freddie were not satisfied until they had looked and had
seen the big black cat cosily asleep  and had heard snap bark outside
when bert called to him from a window 

 the gypsies won t take your pets   their father told the small twins 
and then  hand in hand  they went upstairs again to bed 




chapter iv

the goat


 can t we come  too  

 we re not afraid of the gypsies  not in daytime  

flossie and freddie thus called after their father and bert  as the two
latter started the next morning to go to find the gypsy camp  the night
had passed quietly  snap and snoop were found safe when day dawned  and
after breakfast mr  bobbsey and his older son were to go to lake metoka
and find where the gypsies had stopped with the gay red and yellow
wagons  they were going to see if they could find any trace of helen s
doll  and also things belonging to other people in town  which it was
thought the dark skinned visitors might have taken 

 please let us go   begged the little bobbsey twins 

 oh  my dears  no   said mrs  bobbsey   it s too far  and besides     

 are you afraid the gypsies will carry us off   asked freddie    cause
if you are i ll take my fire engine  and some of the funny bugs that go
around and around and around that we got in new york  and i ll scare the
gypsies with  em and squirt water on  em  

 no  i m not afraid of you or flossie s being carried off  especially
when your father is with you   said mrs  bobbsey   but there is no
telling where the gypsies are camped  and it may be a long walk before
they are found  so you stay with me  and i ll get dinah to let you have
a party  

 oh  that will be fun   cried flossie 

 i d rather play hunt gypsies   said her brother  but when he saw dinah
come out of the kitchen with a tiny little cake she had baked especially
for him and his sister to have a play party with  freddie thought  after
all  there was some fun in staying at home 

 but take snap with you   he said to bert   he ll growl at the gypsy
men  and maybe he ll scare  em so they ll give back helen s doll  

 well  snap can growl hard when he wants to   said bert with a laugh 
 but still i think it wouldn t be a good thing to take him to the gypsy
camp  they nearly always have dogs in their camp  the gypsies do  and
those dogs might get into a fight with snap  

 snap could beat  em   declared freddie 

 no  don t take him   ordered flossie   i don t want snap to get bit  

 i don t either   agreed bert   so i ll leave him at home i guess  well 
there s daddy calling me  i ll have to run  i ll tell you all about it
when i come back  

so  while flossie and freddie  with the little cake dinah had baked for
them  went to have a good time playing party  mr  bobbsey  with a
policeman and bert  went to the gypsy camp  the policeman did not have
on his uniform with brass buttons  in fact  he was dressed almost like
mr  bobbsey 

 for   said this policeman  whose name was joseph carr   if the gypsy
men were to see me coming along in my helmet  with my coat covered with
brass buttons  and a club in my hand  they would know right away who i
was  they could see me a long way off  on account of the sun shining on
the brass buttons  and they would have time to hide away that little
girl s doll  or anything else they may have taken  so i ll go in plain
clothes  

 like a detective   said bert 

 yes  something like a detective   agreed mr  carr   now let s step
along lively  

several persons had seen the gypsy caravan of gay yellow and red wagons
going through lakeport  and had noticed them turn up along the farther
shore of lake metoka  there was a patch of wood several miles away from
the town  and in years past these same gypsies  or others like them  had
camped there  it was to these woods that bert and his father were going 

 do you think we ll find helen s doll   asked the boy 

 well  maybe  bert   answered his father   and yet it may be that the
gypsies have it  but will not give it up  we ll just have to wait and
see what happens  

 if i get sight of it they ll give it up soon enough   said policeman
carr 

after about a two hours  walk bert  his father and mr  carr came to the
woods  through the trees they looked and saw the red and yellow wagons
standing in a circle  near them were tied a number of horses  eating
what little grass grew under the trees  while dogs roamed about here and
there 

 i m glad we didn t bring snap   said bert   there d have been a dog
fight as sure as fate  

 yes  i guess so   agreed his father 

by this time they had entered the gypsy camp  and some of the dark faced
men  with dangling gold rings in their ears  came walking slowly forward
as if to ask the two visitors with the little boy what was wanted 

 we re after a big doll   said mr  bobbsey   one was taken from a little
girl in our town yesterday  perhaps you gypsies took it by mistake  and 
if so  we d be glad to have it back  

 we haven t any doll   growled one big gypsy   we have only what is our
own  

 i m not so sure about that   said mr  carr   we ll have a look about
the camp and see what we can find  

the gypsy growled and said something else  though what it was bert
could not hear  the gypsies did not seem pleased to have visitors  nor
did the dogs who sniffed about the feet of bert  his father and the
policeman  one dog growled  while others barked  and then the gypsy man
who had first spoken made them go away 

 you are wasting your time here   said this gypsy  who seemed to be the
leader  or  king   as he is sometimes called   we have nothing but what
is our own  we have no little girl s doll  

 we ll have a look about   said mr  carr again 

but though the policeman and mr  bobbsey  to say nothing of bert  who
had very sharp eyes  looked all about the gypsy camp  there was no sign
of the missing doll  if a gypsy man had taken it  of which helen  at
least  was very sure  he had either hidden it well or  possibly  had
gone off by himself to some other camp in another part of the woods 

 if the doll would only talk now and tell us where she is  we could get
her   said bert with a laugh to his father  when they had walked
through the camp and come out on the other side 

 that s right   agreed mr  bobbsey   but i m afraid the doll isn t smart
enough for that  do you see anything else that the gypsies may have
taken   asked the twins  father of the policeman 

 i m not sure   answered mr  carr   we had a report of two horses
missing  and they may be here  but most horses look so much alike to me
that i can t tell them apart  i guess i ll have to get the men who own
them to come here and see if they can pick them out  

for half an hour bert  his father and mr  carr roamed through the gypsy
camp  the dark faced men and women scowling at them  and the dogs now
and then barking  if there were any boys or girls in the camp bert did
not see them  and he thought they might be hiding away in some of the
many wagons 

 well  we didn t find the doll   said mr  carr when they were on their
way back to lakeport   but i m sure some of the horses the gypsies have
don t belong to them  the chief of police is going to make them move
away from that camp anyhow  for the man who owns the land doesn t like
the gypsies there  he says they take his neighbors  chickens  

flossie and freddie  as well as helen porter  were much disappointed
when mr  bobbsey and bert came back without the doll  helen was sure
some gypsy had it  but as it could not be found  nothing could be done
about it 

 we ll help you look for your doll this afternoon   said freddie to the
little girl  into whose eyes came tears whenever she thought of her lost
pet   maybe you left mollie under some bush in grace s yard  

 i looked under all the bushes   said helen 

 well  we ll look again   promised freddie  and they did  but no doll
was found 

the next day the gypsies were made to move on with their gaily colored
wagons  their horses and dogs  and though they went  for they had no
right to camp on the land near the lake   they were very angry about it 

 they said they had camped there for many years   reported mr  carr 
telling about the police having driven the dark faced men and women
away   and that they would make whoever it was that drove them away
sorry that he had done such a thing  

 i suppose that means   said mr  bobbsey   that they ll help themselves
from somebody s chicken coop  

 we haven t got any chickens   said freddie 

 but we ve got a dog and a cat   put in flossie   if those gypsies take
snap or snoop i  i ll go after  em  i will  

 so ll i   declared her little fat brother 

 what ll you do when you get to where the gypsies are   asked bert 

 why  i  i ll      began freddie 

 oh  i ll just pick snoop up in my arms and tell snap to come with me
and we ll run home   answered flossie 

 but maybe the gypsies     

 don t  bert   admonished his father   i do not believe that you little
twins need worry about your cat and your dog   he continued 

but for several days and nights after that flossie and freddie were very
much worried lest their pets should be taken away  but the gypsies did
not come back again  at least for a time  and though the small bobbsey
twins again helped helen hunt under many bushes for her talking doll it
could not be found 

 i just  know  the gypsy man took my mollie   declared helen 

 i ll help you get it back if ever i see those gypsies   declared
freddie  but at that time neither he  flossie nor helen realized what
strange things were going to happen about that same talking doll 

it was about a week after this  and summer seemed to have come all of a
sudden  that  when the mail came one morning  mrs  bobbsey saw a postal
card that made her smile as she read it 

 what s it about  momsie   asked freddie  when he noticed his mother s
happy face   are we going back to new york  

 no  but this postal has something to do with something that happened in
new york   was mrs  bobbsey s answer   it is from the express company to
your father  and it says there is  at the express office  a     

just then mrs  bobbsey dropped the postal  and as nan picked it up to
hand to her mother the little girl saw one word 

 oh   cried nan   it s a postal about a goat  

 a  a goat   gasped flossie 

 a goat   shouted freddie   a live goat  

 why  er  yes  i guess so   and nan looked at the postal again 

 oh  i know   cried freddie   it s that goat i almost bought in new
york  mike s goat  oh  did daddy get a goat for us as he promised  
asked the little boy of his mother 




chapter v

a bumpy ride


the bobbsey twins  all four of them  stood in a circle about their
mother  looking eagerly at her and at the postal card which nan had
handed to her  freddie and flossie were smiling expectantly while nan
and bert looked as though they were not quite sure whether or not it was
a joke 

 is it really a goat  mother   asked bert 

 well  that s what this postal says   answered mrs  bobbsey   a goat and
cart have arrived at the express office  and your father is asked to
come to get them and take them away  

 course he s got to take  em away   said freddie   the goat ll be hungry
there  for he can t get anything to eat  

 and he might butt somebody with his horns   added flossie 

 daddy wouldn t buy a butting goat   freddie declared   anyhow  let s go
and get him  i want to have a ride  

 if there really is a goat outfit at the express office for us   said
bert   we d better get it i think  i ll take the postal down to the
lumberyard office and ask daddy     

 i m going with you   cried freddie 

 i m comin   too   added flossie 

 suppose you all go   suggested mrs  bobbsey   your father will tell you
what to do  for i m sure i don t know what to say  i never had a goat 
four twins  a dog and a cat are about all i can manage   she said
laughingly  as fat dinah came waddling into the room to ask what to
order from the grocery 

 a goat  good lan  ob massy   exclaimed the colored cook   dere suah
will be trouble if de honey lambs takes t  playin  wif goats  um  um 
um  a goat  oh  landy  

 i know how to drive a goat   declared freddie   mike  the red haired
boy in new york  showed me  flossie and i had a ride in his wagon for
two cents apiece  it was fun  wasn t it  flossie  

 yep  i liked it  we had lots of fun in new york  freddie rode on a mud
turtle s back and we had bugs that went around and around and around  

 maybe the goat will go around and around and around   said nan  half
laughing 

 well  hurry down to your father s office with the postal   advised mrs 
bobbsey   he ll know what to do  

and when the four excited bobbsey twins  for even bert was excited over
the chance of owning a goat  reached their father s office he told them
all about it 

 you remember   he said   that when freddie and flossie  almost  bought
the goat in new york i promised that if i could find a good one for
sale  with a harness and wagon i d buy it for you this summer  well  i
heard of one the other day  and i got it  having it sent on here by
express  now we ll go down and see what it looks like  

 it s going to be my goat  flossie s and mine  isn t it   asked freddie 
as they started for the express office down near the railroad station 

 no more yours than it will be nan s and bert s  my little fat fireman  
said mr  bobbsey with a laugh   you must all be kind to the goat and
take turns riding in the wagon  

 can t we all ride at once   asked nan 

 well i don t know how large the wagon is   answered mr  bobbsey  as he
started from his lumberyard for the express office with the children 
 maybe you can all get in at once if the goat is strong enough to pull
you  

 i hope he s a big goat   said freddie   then me and bert will drive him
and ride you and flossie  nan  

 don t let him run away with me  that s all i ask   begged nan 
laughing 

they found the goat in a crate on the express platform  near him was a
good sized wagon  like those the children had seen in central park when
on their visit to new york 

 oh  we can all get in it   cried freddie  as he ran from the wagon over
to where the goat was bleating in his crate  the animal was a large
white one  and he seemed gentle when flossie and freddie put their hands
in through the slats of the crate and patted him 

 i think he d like to get out where he can walk around and have
something to eat and drink   said mr  bobbsey   we must take him out of
his crate  

this was soon done with the help of the express agent  and  when the
last piece of wood was taken off  the goat stepped out of his crate in
which he had traveled from a distant city  and gave a loud 

 baa a a a a  

then he stamped his forefeet on the platform  and shook his head  on
which were two horns 

 oh  look out  he ll run away   cried freddie  who was afraid of losing
his goat before there was a chance for a ride 

but the goat seemed tame  kind and gentle  and after walking about a
little  stood still beside the crate and let the children pat him  while
mr  bobbsey paid the express agent 

there was a piece of paper pasted on the crate in which the goat had
traveled  one end of the paper was flapping loose  and  seeing it  the
white animal nibbled at it  and finally ate it  chewing it up as though
he liked it  as indeed he did  not so much for the paper as for the
dried paste by which it had been stuck on 

 oh  look   cried nan   the goat s eating the label off his crate so we
can t send him back  he likes us  i guess  

 we like  him   anyhow   said freddie  laughing and patting the billy 
 come on  bert  hitch him up and give us a ride  

 shall i   asked bert of his father 

 why  yes  i guess so  might as well start now as any time  the man i
bought him from said he was kind and gentle and liked children  harness
him up  bert  

a complete harness had come with the goat and wagon  and when the white
animal had been given a drink of water and fed some grass which flossie
and freddie pulled for him  bert  helped by his father and the express
agent  put the harness on 

 what are we going to call him   asked nan   we ll have to have a name
for our goat  we don t want to call him  it   or  billy   

 name him whisker   said bert   see  he has whiskers just like an old
man  

 oh  that s a nice  funny name   laughed flossie  and freddie thought so
too  so the goat was named whisker  and he seemed to like that as well
as any  what he had been called before they got him  the children did
not know 

whisker did not seem to mind being hitched to the wagon  and when mr 
bobbsey had made sure that all the straps were well fastened  bert took
the front seat  with nan beside him  while flossie and freddie sat in
the back  they set off  mr  bobbsey walking beside the goat to make sure
he did not run away 

but whisker seemed to be a very good goat indeed  and went along nicely 
and so slowly and carefully that freddie  several times  begged to be
allowed to drive 

 i will let you after a while   promised bert   let me get used to him
first  

when the bobbsey twins came riding down their street in the goat wagon
you can imagine how surprised all the other children were  they gathered
in front of the house and rushed into the yard when bert turned whisker
up the driveway 

 oh  give us a ride  give us a ride   cried the playmates of the bobbsey
twins 

 yes  i ll give you all rides   promised bert good naturedly 

then began a jolly time for the bobbsey twins and their friends  whisker
did not seem to mind how many children he hauled around the smooth level
yard at the side of the house  and sometimes the wagon was as full as it
could hold  nor did the goat try to butt any one with his horns  letting
the boys and girls pet him as much as they pleased 

 he s almost as nice as my doll the gypsies took   said helen porter 
after she had had a ride   i like whisker  

 did you find your doll   asked flossie 

 no  i can t find mollie anywhere  i just know she s been turned into a
gypsy  oh  dear  

 flossie and i ll help you find her   promised freddie once again   some
day i m going to drive the goat all alone  and i ll give you and flossie
a long ride  helen  then we ll go off and find your doll  

 that ll be nice   said helen 

the bobbsey twins never knew how many friends they had until they got
the goat wagon  for a time snoop and snap were forgotten  because there
was so much fun to be had with whisker  bert gave many rides to his
little sister and brother and to their playmates  and in a few days
freddie was allowed to drive the goat  so gentle was the white animal 

one day  soon after bert had hitched whisker to the wagon  and was going
to give his two sisters and brother a ride  a telephone message came
from mr  bobbsey  asking bert to come to the lumber office to get
something mr  bobbsey had to send home to his wife 

 i ll give you a ride when i come back   promised bert  hurrying down
the street 

 we ll leave whisker hitched up   said nan   i ll go in and finish
sewing up that hole in my stocking i was mending  

 and i ll stay out here in the goat wagon   said freddie  while flossie
nodded her head to say she would do the same thing 

a little later  and before bert had come back from his father s office 
helen porter came walking past the bobbsey house  looking in the yard 
she saw flossie and freddie seated in the goat wagon 

 come on in   invited flossie   we re having a make believe ride  and
you can ride too  can t she  freddie  

 yep  an  i m going to drive  make believe  come on  helen  when bert
comes i ll ask him to take us to help find the gypsies and get back your
doll  

helen hurried in and took her place in the wagon  and the three children
had lots of fun pretending they were going on a long trip  they did not
really go  for the goat was tied to a post 

 i wish bert would hurry back   said flossie  after a bit   i m tired of
staying in one place so long  

 so m i   said freddie  then he got out of the wagon and began loosening
the strap by which the goat was fastened to the post 

 what re you doing   flossie asked 

 i  i just want to see what whisker ll do   answered the little boy 
 maybe he s tired of standing still  

indeed  the goat seemed to be  for no sooner had freddie got into the
wagon again than off whisker started  walking slowly toward the back of
the yard  where there was a gate to a rear street which led to the
woods 

 whoa   cried freddie  but he did not say it very loudly   whoa 
whisker  where you going  

 oh  he s runnin  away   cried helen   let me out  he s runnin  away  

 no  he s only walking   said freddie   it s all right  as long as he
walks  you won t get hurt  i guess i d better drive him  though  

 can t you stop him   asked flossie   bert won t like it to have us take
him away  

 we aren t taking him away  he s taking  us  away   said freddie   i
can t make him stop  look   again he called   whoa   but the goat did
not obey 

on and on went whisker  slowly at first  then walking a little faster
and pulling after him the wagon with the children in it 

 oh  he s going to the woods   cried flossie  as she saw the goat
heading for the patch of trees at the end of the back street   stop him 
freddie  

 maybe he wants to go there   said freddie   he won t stop for me  

 but it  it s such a bumpy road   said helen  the words being fairly
jarred out of her   it s all  all bu bu bumps and hu hu humps  

 that s  cause we re in the woods   said freddie  for by this time the
goat had drawn the wagon into the shade of the woods  not far from the
bobbsey home  it was indeed a bumpy place  whisker pulling the children
over tree roots and bits of broken wood  but the wagon was stout  and
the goat was strong  then  suddenly  freddie had an idea 

 oh  helen   he cried   i guess whisker is taking us to find your lost
doll  




chapter vi

jolly news


whisker  the big white goat  seemed to know exactly what he was doing 
whether or not it was taking the two smallest bobbsey twins and helen
porter to the woods to find the lost doll  for the goat stepped briskly
along  pulling after him the wagon in which the children rode  they were
bumped about quite a bit  for the path through the woods was anything
but smooth 

in some places there was no path at all  but this did not seem to worry
whisker  he went along anyhow  now and then stopping to nibble at some
green leaves  and again turning to one side to crop some grass 

 do you really think he s taking us to my doll   asked helen eagerly 

 i  i hope so   answered flossie  somewhat doubtfully 

 maybe he is   said freddie   anyhow  the gypsies that took your doll
mollie came to the woods  and we re in the woods  and maybe the doll is
here and maybe we ll find her  

that was as much as freddie could think of at one time  especially as he
had to hold the reins that were fast to the bit in whisker s mouth  for
the goat was driven just as a horse or pony is driven  and freddie was
doing the driving this time 

at least the little boy thought he was  and that was very near the same
thing  but whisker went along by himself pretty much as he pleased 
really not needing much driving by the leather reins  and he never
needed to be whipped  in fact  there was not a whip in the wagon  for
the bobbsey children never thought of using it  they were kind to their
goat 

 oh  i m falling out   suddenly cried helen  as the wagon went over a
very rough  bumpy place in the path 

 hold on tight like me   said flossie   anyhow   she went on  as she
looked out of the wagon   if you do fall you won t get hurted much 
 cause there s a lot of soft moss and leaves on the ground  

 but i ll get my dress dirty   said helen 

 then we ll go down to the lake and wash it off   said freddie  for the
woods in which they now were led down to the shore of the lake 

 well  i don t want to fall  anyhow   said helen    most always when i
fall i bump my nose  an  it hurts  

 it s smoother now  and i guess the wagon won t tip over   observed
freddie  a little later 

they had come now to a wider path in the woods  where it was not so
bumpy  and the wagon rolled easily over the moss and leaves as whisker
pulled it along 

 it s nice in here   said flossie  looking about her 

 yes  i m glad whisker took us for a ride   said freddie 

 he wouldn t have if you hadn t unhitched his strap   remarked flossie 
 what ll bert say  

 well  whisker was tired of standing still   went on her brother   and 
anyhow  helen wanted to come for a ride to find her doll  didn t you  
he asked their little playmate 

 yep  i did   she answered   i want my doll mollie awful much  

 then we ll look for her   freddie went on   whoa  whisker  

whether the goat really stopped because freddie said this word  which
always makes horses stop  or whether whisker was tired and wanted a
rest  i can not say  anyhow  he stopped in a shady place in the woods 
and the children got out 

 i ll tie the goat to a tree so he can t go off and have a ride by
himself   said freddie  as he took the strap from the wagon 

but whisker did not seem to want to go on any farther  he lay down on
some soft moss and seemed to go to sleep 

 we ll leave him here until we come back   said freddie   and now we ll
look for helen s doll  

perhaps the children had an idea that the gypsies may have left the
talking doll behind in the woods when they were driven away by the
police  for  though they were not near the place where the dark skinned
men and women had camped  flossie  freddie and helen began looking under
trees and bushes for a trace of the missing mollie 

 do you s pose she can talk and call to tell you where she is   asked
flossie  when they had hunted about a bit  not going too far from the
goat and wagon 

 i don t know   helen answered   sometimes  when i wind up the spring in
her back she says  mamma  and  papa  without my pushing the button  my
father says that s because something is the matter with her  

 well  if she would only talk now  and holler out  we d know where to
look for her   added freddie 

 let s call to her   suggested flossie 

 all right   agreed helen 

 illustration   mollie  mollie  where are you  

 the bobbsey twins on blueberry island    page 63  

so the children called 

 mollie  mollie  where are you  

their voices echoed through the trees  but there was no other answer  at
least for a while  then  when they had walked on a little farther  and
found a spring of water where they had a cool drink  they called again 

 mollie  mollie  where are you  

then  all at once  seemingly from a long way off  came an answering
call 

 wait a minute  i m coming  

 oh  did you hear that   gasped flossie 

 it was somebody talking to us   whispered helen 

 and it wasn t the echo  either   went on flossie 

 maybe it was your doll   suggested freddie   did it sound like her
voice  

 a  a little   said helen slowly 

 we ll call again   suggested flossie  and once more the children cried
aloud 

 mollie  mollie  where are you  

 wait a minute  stand still so i can find you  i m coming   was the
answer 

the three little ones looked at one another in surprise  and they were 
moreover  a little frightened  was it possible that the missing  talking
doll was really in the woods and had answered them  that it could talk 
because it had a phonograph inside  they all knew  but would it answer
when spoken to 

 it didn t sound like mollie   whispered helen  after a bit   her voice
wasn t as loud as that  

 oh o o o o   suddenly gasped flossie   maybe it was  the gypsies  

that was something the children had not thought of before  suppose it
should be the same gypsy man who had taken away the doll 

 it couldn t be the gypsies   said freddie  looking around him   they
all went away  daddy said so  

 but maybe there was  one  left   suggested his sister 

 pooh  i m not afraid of  one  gypsy   declared freddie   if he bothers
me i ll sic whisker on him  

 you can t sic a goat  they can t bite or bark like a dog   retorted
flossie 

 no  but whisker can butt with his horns   cried freddie   that s what
i ll do  if it s a gypsy i ll sic whisker on him  

just then the children heard the voice again  calling 

 where are you  i want to find you  

once more they looked at one another rather afraid  and then came a
loud  baa a a a a   from whisker 

 come on   cried freddie   maybe they re trying to take our goat away  

he started on a run through the woods toward the place where they had
left whisker and the wagon  now out of sight behind some bushes 

 wait  wait for me   cried flossie  who was left behind with helen 
 don t run off without us  freddie  

 oh  excuse me   he said  politely enough   but we don t want those
gypsies to take whisker  

 whisker ll butt  em   said flossie   wait for us  

 yes  i guess our goat won t let anybody take him   went on freddie 
walking now  instead of running   come on  flossie and helen  maybe it s
your doll talking and maybe it isn t  but we ll soon see  

together the three children hurried on  soon coming within sight of the
goat  there was whisker peacefully lying down  still asleep  and running
toward him  along the woodland path  was bert  who  as he caught sight
of freddie and the others  called 

 oh  there you are  i ve been looking everywhere for you  didn t you
hear me calling  

 was that you   asked freddie   we thought maybe it was a gypsy man  

 or helen s doll   added flossie   her doll  mollie  can talk  you know 
bert  and whisker gave us a ride here so we looked for the doll  

 yes  and then i had to come looking for you   said her brother   but
never mind  i ve found you and i ve got jolly news  

 do you mean jolly news because you found us   asked freddie 

 no  it s jolly news about something else   bert said   but i ve got to
hurry home with you so mother won t worry  then i ll tell you  




chapter vii

where is snap 


 how did you youngsters come to run away   asked bert  when he was
driving the goat wagon back through the woods again  taking a path that
was not quite so bumpy as the first one   my goodness  i came back from
daddy s office to find mother and nan looking everywhere for you  how
did you happen to run away  

 we didn t runned away   said flossie  who was so excited over what had
happened that she forgot to speak the way her teacher in school had told
her to   whisker runned away with us  

 i guess he didn t go without being told  and without some one s taking
off his hitching strap   said bert  with a smile 

 anyhow  we didn t run much  whisker just walked most of the time   said
freddie 

 well  it s all the same   returned bert   i had to chase after you to
find you  didn t you hear me calling  

 yes  but we thought it was gypsies or helen s doll   answered flossie 
 we were looking for mollie  you know  

 you ll not find her unless you find that band of gypsies   said bert 
 anyhow  you mustn t come off to the woods alone  you little children  

 we had whisker with us   freddie declared   and if any of the gypsy men
had come he d have butted  em with his horns  

 he might  and he might not   went on bert   anyhow  i guess you had a
nice ride  

 we did   said flossie   only we re sorry we couldn t find helen s doll 
how did you find us  bert  

 oh  i could see by the wheel and hoof marks in the soft dirt which way
whisker had taken the wagon  and i just followed  

 but what is the jolly news   freddie demanded   are we going back to
new york  

 better than that   answered bert   we re going camping  

 camping   cried the two little bobbsey twins in the same breath 
 where   asked freddie   when   asked flossie 

 it isn t all settled yet   answered bert   you know daddy and mother
talked about it when we were in the big city  and to day  when i was
down at the lumberyard i heard daddy speaking to a man in there about
some of the islands in lake metoka  daddy wanted to know which one was
the best to camp on  

 and did the man say which was a good one   asked freddie 

 i didn t hear  but i asked daddy afterward if we were going to camp
this summer  and he said he guessed so  if mother wanted to  

 does mother want to   asked flossie eagerly 

 she says she does   answered bert   so i guess we ll go to camp this
summer all right  isn t that jolly news  

 um   said freddie  not opening his mouth  for in one pocket of his
little jacket he had found a sweet cracker he had forgotten  and he was
now chewing on it  after having given his sister and helen some 

 oh  i wish we could go now and take whisker with us   cried flossie 

 if we go we ll take the goat cart   decided bert 

 and we ll take our dog snap  and our cat snoop  too   announced
freddie   they ll like to go camping  

mrs  bobbsey and nan were anxiously waiting for bert to come back with
the runaways  and when he came in sight  driving the goat cart  the
children s mother hurried down the back road to meet them 

 oh  my dears  you shouldn t go away like that   she called 

 whisker wanted to go   said freddie   and we had a nice ride even if it
was bumpy  and we thought we heard mollie s doll calling  but it was
bert  

 well  don t do it again   said mrs  bobbsey  she always said that 
whenever either set of twins did things they ought not to do  and each
time they promised to mind  but the trouble was they hardly ever did the
same thing twice  and as there were so many things to do  mrs  bobbsey
could not think of them all  so she could not tell nan and bert 
flossie and freddie not to do them 

 when are we going camping   asked freddie  as he got out of the goat
cart 

 and what island are we going on   asked flossie 

 oh  my  i see you have it all settled so soon   laughed mrs  bobbsey 
 your father and i have yet to talk it over 

 we ll do that to night   she went on   and now you children come in and
get washed  and dinah will give you something to eat  you must be
hungry  

 we are   said flossie   and helen s hungry  too  aren t you  helen  
she asked 

 um  yes  i guess so  

 well  we ll soon find out   laughed mrs  bobbsey   i think your mother
won t mind if i give you a little lunch with flossie and freddie  nan
can tell her that you are here and are all right  she doesn t know you
had a runaway ride in the goat wagon  

 it was a bumpy ride  too   explained flossie   and we didn t find
mollie the talking doll  

 well  maybe you will some day   said mrs  bobbsey kindly 

and while flossie  freddie and helen ate the nice little lunch  fat 
black dinah got ready for them  bert and nan went for a ride in the goat
wagon  stopping at mrs  porter s house to tell her that helen was safe
in the bobbsey home 

 and now let s talk about camping   cried bert that night after supper
when the family  twins included  were gathered in the dining room  the
table having been cleared   when can we go  

 i think as soon as school closes   said his father   summer seems to
have started in early this year  and i want to get you children and your
mother off to some cool place  an island in the middle of the lake is
the best place i can think of  

 it will be fine   cried bert   which island are we going to camp on  

 there are two or three that would do nicely   answered mr  bobbsey   i
talked to some friends who own them  but i think one called blueberry
island would suit us best  

 it has a nice name   said nan   i like  blueberry island  it sounds
just as if it were out of a book  

 is it a fairy island   freddie wanted to know  for he liked to have
fairy stories read to him 

 well  maybe it will turn out to be a fairy story   said mr  bobbsey
with a laugh   it s the largest island in the lake  and several other
parties are going there camping  so mr  ames  the man who owns it  told
me  

 why do they call it blueberry island   asked mrs  bobbsey 

 because there are many blueberries on it   answered her husband   and
if we go there i shall expect you children to pick plenty of blueberries
so dinah can make pies  i m very fond of blueberry pie  

 i like it  too   said freddie   we ll take whisker with us  and he can
haul a whole wagon load of blueberries  

 i wouldn t ask you to pick as many as that   said his father with a
laugh   two or three quarts would be enough for a pie  wouldn t they 
mother  

 i should hope so  but do you really mean we are to go camping on
blueberry island  

 surely   answered mr  bobbsey   it will be a nice way to spend the
summer  

 and shall we live in a tent   asked freddie   and cook over a camp
fire  and go fishing  and  and  and     

 yes  all of that and more  too   said his father  catching up the
little fat fireman and bouncing him toward the ceiling 

then followed a happy hour talking over the plans for going camping on
blueberry island  until mother bobbsey said it was time for flossie and
freddie  at least  to go to bed 

off they went to slumberland  to dream of living in a big white tent
with a flag on top of it 

 just like a circus   as freddie said the next morning at breakfast 

 or a gypsy camp   added flossie   are there any gypsies on blueberry
island  daddy  

 no  not a one  

  cause if there was   went on the little girl   i wouldn t take my doll
with me  i wouldn t want her tooked away like helen s was  

 we won t let any gypsies come   said mr  bobbsey 

one warm summer day came after another until it was nearly time to close
the school  and all the boys and girls in lakeport were thinking of
vacation  the bobbseys were getting ready to go to the blueberry island
camp  mr  bobbsey had bought the tents and other things and they were to
go to the island in a boat 

 and we ll take whisker  our goat  and snap and snoop   said flossie 
 and my dolls and the bugs that go around and around and around and     

 you ll have a regular menagerie   said nan 

 we ll have some fun  anyhow   cried freddie   i wonder if we could
hitch snap and whisker up together and make a team  

 let s try   suggested bert   come on  freddie  we ll find our dog  

but when they called snap he did not come running in from the yard or
barn as he had always done before  bert and freddie called  but there
was no answering bark 

 where is snap  dinah   asked bert  when a search about the house did
not show the missing dog 

 i done seed him heah about half an hour ago   said the colored cook 
 an  den  all to oncet  i didn t see him ag in  i wonder if dat ole
peddler could hab took him   she asked  speaking half to herself 

bert and freddie looked at one another in surprise  where was snap 




chapter viii

off to camp


 this is queer   said bert  when a more careful search about the house
and barn failed to find snap   if he s run away  it will be about the
first time he has done that since we ve had him  

 let s ask at some of the houses down the street   said nan   sometimes
the children coax him in to play with them  and he forgets to come home
because they make such a fuss over him  

 here s snoop  anyhow   cried freddie  coming out of the barn with the
big black cat in his arms   he can go to camp with us  

 but we want snap  too   added flossie   we need a dog to keep the
gypsies away  

 there won t be any gypsies on blueberry island   bert reminded them 

 you can t tell   declared freddie 

 maybe there ll be one or two  an  i don t want them to take my doll the
way they did helen s   added flossie 

 didn t helen get her doll back   asked mrs  bobbsey  coming out of the
house in time to hear what the children were saying 

 no m  and she feels awful sad   replied flossie   and now the gypsies
has took snap  

 the gypsies have  taken  snap  really  flossie  you must speak more
correctly   said mrs  bobbsey   but what do you mean about snap s being
taken  

 he seems to be gone   reported bert 

 we ve looked everywhere for him  and now we re going to ask down the
street   added nan 

 but we ve got snoop   said flossie  and so it was   we   that is  she
and freddie both  had the big black cat  one twin carrying the head and
the other twin the hind legs  but snoop was often carried that way and
he did not mind 

 snap not here  that is odd   said mrs  bobbsey   have you whistled and
called to him  

 every way we know   replied bert   listen   and  putting his fingers in
his mouth  he gave such a shrill whistle that his mother and nan had to
cover their ears  while fat dinah  waddling to her kitchen window 
cried 

 good land ob massy  what am dat  a fire whistle  

 i can whistle like that   shouted freddie  dropping his end of the
black cat  as it happened to be the head end he was carrying  this left
the hind legs to flossie and poor snoop was thus dangling head down 

 miaou   he cried sadly  and then he gave a wriggle  and another one 
and got loose 

freddie made a sort of hissing sound on his fingers  not at all a nice 
loud whistle as bert had done  but it was pretty good for a little
fellow 

 he ought to hear that   bert said  when he was done blowing his call 
and his mother and sister had uncovered their ears   but he doesn t
come  

 did you ask dinah about him   mrs  bobbsey questioned 

 yes  and she said    oh  she said something about a peddler   cried
nan   we forgot to ask her what she meant  

 did snap chase after a peddler   asked bert  for the colored cook was
still at the window 

 no  i didn t see you all s dog chase after de peddler  honey lamb  
replied dinah   but jest a little while ago a woman wif a red dress on 
all trimmed wif yaller  real fancy like  comed to de back do  sellin 
lace work  snap was heah den  eatin  some scraps i put out fo  him  an 
de woman patted him an  talked to him in a queer like way  

 she did   cried bert excitedly   what d she say  

 lan  goodness  you all don t s pose i knows all de queer languages in
de united states  does yo    asked dinah  shaking her kinky head   but
de woman talked queer t  snap  an  he wagged his tail  which he don t
often does t  strangers  

 no   put in flossie  shaking her head vigorously   snap don t often
talk to strangers  he s awful dig dignified with  em  isn t he 
freddie  

 well  he doesn t like tramps  and they re strangers   replied her
brother   are peddlers tramps  bert  

 no  i guess not  but some of  em look like tramps  pretty near  maybe  

 what happened to the woman peddler   asked mrs  bobbsey 

 oh  i soon got rid ob her   said dinah   i tole her we was gwine t  lib
in de woods an  we didn t want no fancy lace  cause it would git all
ripped on de trees an  bushes  so she went off  

 and what happened to snap   asked mrs  bobbsey 

 oh  he was eatin  his scraps de last i seen ob him   answered dinah 
 an  he wagged his tail ag in at de woman in de gay dress what looked
like she was gwine on a picnic  

 a dress of red and yellow   said nan   isn t that the color the gypsies
wear  

 was the woman a gypsy   asked bert quickly 

 she mought o  been   answered the cook   she had gold rings in her
ears  an  she was dark  not as dark as me or sam  but like some of them
eytalian men  i didn t pay much  tention to her   cause i was makin  a
cake  but maybe snap done followed her to see to it she didn t take
nuffin   cause ef she was a gypsy she mought take things  

 yes  and she s taken snap  that s what she s done   cried bert   that s
what s happened to our dog  the gypsies have him  i m going to tell
daddy  and have him get a policeman  

 now don t be too sure   advised mrs  bobbsey   perhaps that peddler may
have been a gypsy  and she may have made friends with snap  those people
have a strange way with them about dogs and horses  but it isn t fair to
say she took your pet  he may have followed her just to be friendly  you
had better ask at some of the houses down the street first  

 come on   cried bert to nan   we ll go and ask  

 and i m coming  too   added freddie   i can call snap and you can
whistle for him  bert  

 and i ll take snoop  and snoop can miaou for him   said flossie 

 no  you two little ones stay here   directed mrs  bobbsey   i want to
wash and dress you for dinner  let bert and nan hunt for snap  

 then can t we go in the goat cart   freddie asked 

 we ll all have a ride when we come back   promised bert   we first want
to find snap  if we can  to see if he ll hitch up with whisker   the boy
told his mother 

so while flossie and freddie went into the house to get freshened up
after their play  nan and bert went from house to house asking about
snap  but though the big  trick dog sometimes went to play with the
neighbors  children  this time there was no sign of him  one after
another of the families on the block said they had not seen snap 

several servants had noticed the gypsy woman  peddler   as they called
her  for she had made a number of calls on the block  trying to sell her
lace  but no one had seen snap with her 

 oh  i guess snap just ran away for a change  as flossie and freddie
sometimes do   said mr  bobbsey when he came home that evening and had
been told what had happened   he ll come back all right  i m sure  

but nan and bert were not so sure of this  they knew snap too well  he
had never gone away like this before  flossie and freddie  being
younger  did not worry so much  besides  they had snoop  and the cat was
more their pet than was the dog  who was bert s favorite  though  of
course  every one in the bobbsey family loved him 

several times that evening bert went outside to whistle and call for his
pet  but there was no answering bark  and when bedtime came bert was so
worried that mr  bobbsey agreed to call the police and ask the officers
who were on night duty to keep a lookout for the missing animal  this
would be done  the chief said  since nearly all the officers in lakeport
knew snap  who often visited at the police station 

morning came  but no snap was at the door waiting to be let in  though
bert was up early to look  snoop  the big black cat  was in his usual
place  getting up to stretch and rub against bert s legs 

 but where s snap   asked the boy 

 miaou   was all snoop answered  perhaps he knew  but could not tell 

 well  i m afraid your dog is lost   said mr  bobbsey  when at the
breakfast table bert reported that snap was still away   we ll put an
advertisement in the paper and offer a reward if he is brought back  

 maybe he s gone to camp on blueberry island and is waiting over there
for us   said flossie 

 maybe  my little fat fairy   agreed her father  catching her up for a
good bye kiss   let s hope so  and now you must soon begin to get ready
to go camping  

the children heard this news with delight  and  for a time  even lost
snap was forgotten  he had often visited the neighbors before  and had
always come back  so bert hoped the same thing would happen this time 

there was much to do to get ready to go to blueberry island  there were
clothes to pack and food to be bought  for though it was not many miles
from the island back to the mainland where there were stores  still
mrs  bobbsey did not want to have to send in too often for what was
needed 

the goat wagon was very useful for going on errands during the days that
it took them to get ready to go off to live in the woods  bert and nan 
sometimes with flossie and freddie  rode here and there about town  and
whisker was as good as a pony  being strong and gentle 

everywhere they went nan and her brother looked for snap and asked
about him  but  though many in lakeport knew the dog  and had seen
him  on the day he was last noticed  no one could tell where he was 
no one could be found who had seen him with the gypsy woman  if he had
gone with her  though a number said they had noticed the gaudy 
red and yellow dressed peddler strolling about with her lace 

 our dog s gone and helen s doll is gone   said nan the night before
they were to go to camp   i wonder what will be taken next  

 i hope they don t get our snoop   said flossie  as she went to look at
the big black cat who was sleeping in the box  with a handle  in which
he was to be taken to the island 

 and i hope they let whisker alone   said freddie 

 whisker can take care of himself  with his horns   observed bert   i m
not afraid of a gypsy trying to get our goat  

the tents had been sent to the island  and a man would set them up 
plenty of good things to eat were packed in boxes and baskets  dinah and
sam had made ready to go to camp  for they were included in the family 
dinah was to do the cooking and her husband was to look after the boats
and firewood 

 and  oh  what fun we ll have   cried flossie the next morning  when the
sun rose warm and bright and they started for blueberry island 

 it would be better if we had snap   said bert   you don t know how i
miss that dog  

 we all do   said mrs  bobbsey   perhaps we ll find him when we come
back  bert  your father will come back from the island once or twice a
week  and he ll come to the house to see if snap has come back  

 he ll never come back   said bert  with a sad face   i m sure the
gypsies took him  and they ll keep him when they find out he can do
circus tricks  

 well  maybe we ll find the gypsies and  if they have snap  we can make
them give him up   said nan 

 i hope so   murmured bert 

there was a small steamer that made trips across the lake  and in this
the bobbseys were to go to blueberry island  as they had so many things
to take with them that a small boat would never have held them all 




chapter ix

a night scare


 well  are you all ready   asked daddy bobbsey  as he came out and
locked the front door  on the steps in front of him  or else down the
front walk  were his wife  nan  bert  flossie  freddie  sam  dinah 
snoop  in his traveling crate  whisker  the goat  hitched to his wagon 
and a pile of trunks  boxes and other things 

 if we re not ready we never will be   said mrs  bobbsey with a sigh and
a laugh  as she looked over everything   we aren t going so far  but
what we can send for anything we forget  which is a good thing  but i
guess we re all ready  daddy  

 good  here comes the expressman for our trunks  and behind him is the
automobile we re going to take down to the steamer dock  now have you
children everything you want   and he looked at flossie and freddie
particularly 

 i ve got my best doll  and snoop s in his cage   said flossie   and my
other dolls are in the trunk and so are the toys i want  is your fire
engine packed  freddie   cause you might want it if the woods got on
fire  

 yep  my fire engine is all right   answered the little fellow   an 
i ve got everything i want  i guess  except  maybe      he was thinking
then   oh  i forgot  em  i forgot  em   he quickly cried   open the
door  daddy  i forgot  em  

 forgot what   his father asked with a smile 

 the tin bugs that go around and around and around   answered freddie 
 you know  the ones i buyed in new york  i want  em  

 well  it s a good thing you thought of them before we got away  for i
wouldn t have wanted to come back just to get the tin bugs  

 but they go around and around and around   cried flossie  who liked the
queer toys as much as did her brother   they re lots of fun  

 well  as long as we re going to camp on blueberry island for fun as
much as for anything else   said mr  bobbsey   i suppose we ll have to
get the bugs  come on  freddie  

the little twin had wrapped his tin bugs in a paper and left them on a
chair in the front hall  so it was little trouble to get them  then the
trunks  bags and bundles were piled in the wagon and taken to the
steamboat dock  while the bobbsey family  all except bert  took their
places in the automobile  bert was to drive whisker to the wharf  as it
was found easier to ship the goat and wagon this way than by crating or
boxing the animal and his cart 

 i d rather ride with bert and whisker than in the auto   said freddie
wistfully  as he saw his brother about to drive off 

 so would i   added flossie  who always chimed in with anything her twin
brother did 

 but you can t   said mrs  bobbsey decidedly   if you two small twins
went with bert in the goat wagon something would be sure to happen 
you d stop to give some one a ride or you d have a race with a dog or a
cat  and then we d miss the boat  you must come with us  flossie and
freddie  and  bert  don t lose any time  the boat won t wait for you and
whisker  

 i ll be there before you   promised bert  and he was  for he took a
short cut  he said on the way he had stopped at the police station to
ask if there was any news about the missing snap  but the trick dog had
not been seen  and so the bobbseys went to camp without him 

if there had not been so much to see and to do  they would have been
more lonesome for snap than they were  as it was  they missed him very
much  but bert held out a little hope by saying perhaps they might find
their pet on blueberry island  though why he said it he hardly knew 

 all aboard   called the steamboat men as the bobbseys settled
themselves in comfort  their goods having been put in place  the goat
wagon was left on the lower deck where stood the horses and wagons that
were to be taken across the lake  for the steamer was a sort of
ferryboat   all aboard   called the deck hands 

there was a tooting of whistles  a clanging and ringing of bells  and
the boat slowly moved away from the dock 

 oh  it s just lovely to go camping   sighed nan 

 we haven t really begun yet   said bert   wait until we get to the
woods and have to go hunting for what we want to eat  and cook it over
an open fire  that s the way to live  

 i guess there won t be much hunting on blueberry island   said mr 
bobbsey  with a laugh 

 well  we can make believe  can t we   asked freddie 

 oh  yes  you can make believe   said his mother   and that  sometimes 
is more fun than having real things  

i will not tell you all the things that happened on the steamboat  for
so much more happened on blueberry island that i will have to hurry on
to that  besides  the trip to the middle of the lake did not take more
than an hour  and not much can take place in an hour 

i say not much  and yet sometimes lots of things can  but not a great
deal did to the bobbseys this time  though  to be sure  a strange dog
tried to get hold of snoop in his crate  and freddie nearly fell
overboard reaching after his hat  which blew off 

 but i could swim even if i did fall in   he said  for mr  bobbsey had
taught all four twins how to keep afloat in water 

 well  we don t want you falling in   his mother answered   now you sit
by me  

this freddie did for a short time  then he got tired of sitting still
and jumped down from his chair  at the same time calling to his little
sister 

 say  flossie  let s go and watch the engine  

 all right   answered the little girl  ready  as always  to do anything
her brother suggested 

as flossie jumped from her chair to join her brother  she accidently
kicked an umbrella belonging to a man who was sitting near by  and the
umbrella fell to the floor and slipped out under the railing right into
the water 

 oh  oh  oh   gasped flossie 

but freddie turned and ran as fast as he could to the stairs that led to
the lower deck 

 here  where are you going   cried his father  and started after his
son 

 goin  after that umbrella  

 i think not   and mr  bobbsey caught up with freddie and picked him up
in his arms 

meanwhile  mrs  bobbsey told the man how sorry she was  and said that
they would replace the umbrella  but the man returned that he would not
allow that 

 no one needs an umbrella on such a lovely day  anyway   he said 

but a deckhand who was cleaning some mops in the water had already
rescued the umbrella 

 blueberry island   called a man on the steamer  after the boat had made
one or two other stops   all off for blueberry island  

 oh  let us off  let us off   cried flossie  getting up in such a hurry
from her deck chair that she dropped her doll   we re going camping
there  

 i guess the passengers know it by this time  without your telling
them   laughed her father   but come on  don t forget anything  

such a scrambling as there was  such a gathering together of
packages  umbrellas  fishing rods  hats  caps  gloves and the crate
with black snoop in it  sam and dinah helped all they could  and between
them and mr  and mrs  bobbsey and the children the family managed to get
ashore at last 

a gangplank had been run from the boat to the dock  and over this bert
drove whisker and the goat cart  the goat seemed glad to get off the
steamboat 

 oh  wouldn t snap just love it here   cried nan  as they went on shore
and looked at the island   isn t it too bad he isn t with us  

 i m going to find him   declared bert   those old gypsies sha n t have
our trick dog  

blueberry island was  indeed  a fine place for a camp  in the winter no
one lived on it  but in the summer it was often visited by picnic
parties and by those who liked to gather the blueberries which grew so
plentifully  giving the island its name 

in fact  so many people came to one end of the island in the berry
season that a man had set up a little stand near the shore  where he
sold sandwiches  coffee  candy  and ice cream  since many of the
berry pickers  and others who came  grew hungry after tramping through
the woods 

but where mr  bobbsey was going to camp with his family  the
berry pickers and picnic parties seldom came  as it was on the far end
of the island  so our friends would be rather by themselves  which was
what they wanted 

mr  dalton  the man who kept the little refreshment stand  had his horse
and wagon on the island  and he had agreed to haul the bobbsey s trunks
and other things to where their tents  already put up  awaited them 

 and can t we ride there in the goat wagon   asked freddie of his
mother  as he saw bert get up behind whisker in the little cart 

 yes  i think you and flossie may ride now that we are on the island  
said mrs  bobbsey   do you want to go  nan  

 no  i ll walk with you and daddy  i ll get enough goat rides later  

 oh  how nice it is   cried mother bobbsey when she and nan came in
sight of the tents of the camp   i know we shall like it here  

 i hope you will   said her husband   and now we must see about
something to eat  i suppose the children are hungry  

 dey s always dat way   laughed fat dinah   i neber seen  em when dey
wasn t hungry  but jest show me whar s de cook stove an  suffin  t 
cook  an  dey won t be hungry long  mah honey lambs  

dinah was as good as her word  and she soon had a fine meal on the table
in the dining tent  for the men mr  bobbsey had hired to set up the
canvas houses had everything in readiness to go right to  housekeeping  
as nan said 

there were several tents for the bobbsey family  one large one was for
the family to sleep in  while a smaller one  near the kitchen tent  was
for dinah and her husband  then there was a tent that served as a
dining room  and another where the trunks and food could be stored  in
this tent was an ice box  for a boat stopped at the island every day and
left a supply of ice 

the children helped to unpack and settle camp  though  if the truth were
told  perhaps they did more to unsettle it than otherwise  but mr  and
mrs  bobbsey were used to this  and knew how to manage 

so the meal was eaten  whisker was put in his little stable  made under
a pile of brush wood  and the children went out rowing in a boat  they
had lots of fun that afternoon  and bert even did a little hunting for
snap  thinking that  by some chance  the trick dog might be on the
island  but snap was not to be found 

 though  of course  we didn t half look   bert said   we ll look again
to morrow  

and now it was evening in  twin camp   as the bobbseys had decided to
call their place on blueberry island  there had been quite a talk as to
what to name the camp  but when dinah suggested  twin   every one agreed
that it was best  so  twin camp  it was called  and daddy bobbsey said
he would have a wooden sign made with that on it  and a flag to hoist
over it on a pole 

beds were made up in the sleeping tent  and soon even nan and bert
declared that they were ready to go to slumberland by the quickest
train or steamboat which was headed for that place  they had been up
early and had been very busy  flossie and freddie dropped off to sleep
as soon as they put their heads on the pillows 

freddie did not know what time it was when he awakened  it was in the
night  he was sure of that  for it was dark in the tent except where the
little oil light was aglow  what had awakened him was something bumping
against him  his cot was near one of the walls of the sleeping tent and
he awoke with a start 

 hi   he called  as he felt something strike against him   who s doin 
that  stop it  stop it  i say  

 freddie  are you talking in your sleep   asked his mother  who had not
slept very soundly 

 no  i m not asleep   freddie answered   but something bumped me  it s
outside the tent  

 maybe it s whisker feeling of you with his horns   said flossie  who
slept near her brother  and who had been awakened when he called out so
loudly 

 it  it didn t feel like whisker  it was softer than his horns   freddie
said   momsie  i want to come into your bed  

 no  freddie  you must stay where you are  i guess it was only the wind
blowing on you  

 no  it wasn t   said freddie   it was a bump that hit me  i m afraid
over here  




chapter x

the  go around  bugs


without waiting for his mother to tell him that he might  freddie
slipped off his cot and went scurrying over the board floor of the tent
toward mrs  bobbsey s bed 

 i m coming  too   said flossie  who generally went everywhere her small
brother did 

 did something hit you  too   asked freddie  turning to his sister 

 no  but it might  if you are afraid i m afraid  too  

 oh  you children   said mrs  bobbsey with sigh   i believe you only
dreamed it  freddie  

 no  momsie  i didn t  really i didn t  somethin  bumped me from outside
the tent  it hit me in the back  not hard  but sort of soft like 
an   an  i woked up  i want to sleep with you  

 what s it all about   asked daddy bobbsey  then freddie had to explain
again  and flossie also talked until nan and bert were awakened 

 it might have been whisker   said bert   if he got loose and brushed
against the tent and freddie had rolled with his back close against the
side it would be like that  

just then there sounded in the night the  baa a a a a   of the white
goat 

 there he is   cried bert 

 but it sounds as though he were still safely tied up   said mr 
bobbsey   i ll have a look outside  too bad we haven t snap with us 
he d give the alarm in a minute if anything were wrong  

the goat bleated again  but the sound did not seem near the tent  as it
would have done if whisker has been loose  putting on his bath robe and
slippers  mr  bobbsey took a lantern and went outside  bert wanted to
come with his father  but mrs  bobbsey would not hear of it 

 we want a little man in here to look after us   she said  smiling 

 ain t i almost a man  i can make my fire engine go   freddie said 
forgetting his fright  now that the  big folks  were up  and the light
in the tent was turned higher 

they could hear mr  bobbsey walking around outside  and they heard him
speaking to the goat who bleated again  mr  bobbsey was as fond of
animals as were his children  and whisker was almost like a dog  he was
so tame and gentle 

 was the goat loose  daddy   asked nan  when her father came back into
the tent 

 no  he was tied all right in his little stable  it wasn t whisker who
brushed against freddie  if  indeed  anything did  

 something  did    declared the small boy   didn t i wake up  

 well  you might have dreamed it   said nan   you often talk in your
sleep  i know  

 i did feel something bump me   declared freddie  and nothing the others
could say would make him change his idea 

 did you see anything   asked mrs  bobbsey in a low voice of her husband
when the twins were in their beds again  flossie s and freddie s cots
were moved over nearer to those of their parents   and they had dropped
off to slumber again  after getting drinks of water 

 well  i rather think i did   answered mr  bobbsey in a low voice 

 you did  what  

 i don t know whether it was a horse or a man  but it was something  it
was so dark i couldn t see well  and the trees and bushes come up around
the tents  

 how could it be a horse  

 it might have been the one that belongs to mr  dalton  if the horse
were walking around  cropping grass wherever he could find it  he might
have brushed past the side of the tent and so have disturbed freddie  

 yes  i suppose so   agreed mrs  bobbsey   but couldn t you tell a horse
from a man  

 no  it was too dark  i only just saw a shadow moving away from the
tents as i stepped out  

 and was whisker all right  

 yes  though i guess he was lonesome  he tried to follow me back here
when i left him  

 i suppose whisker misses the children   said mrs  bobbsey   but do you
think it could be a man who was wandering about our tents  

 it  could  be  yes  

 one of the gypsies  

 oh  i wouldn t say as to that  in fact  i don t believe the gypsies are
anywhere around here  the children have that notion in their heads  but
i don t believe in it  perhaps it was a blueberry picker who was lost  

 but if he was lost  and saw our tents  he d stop and ask to be set on
the right road   went on mrs  bobbsey   besides  blueberries won t be
ripe for another week or so  and nobody picks them green  

 no  i suppose not   agreed her husband   well  i m sure i don t know
who or what it was  but i saw a dark shadow moving away  

 shadows can t do any harm  

 no  but it takes some one or something to make a shadow  and i d like
to know what it was  i ll take a look around in the morning   said mr 
bobbsey   we don t want twin camp spoiled by midnight scares  

 maybe we d better get another dog  if snap doesn t come back  
suggested his wife 

 i ll think about that  we can t very well train whisker to keep watch 
besides  he can t bark   and mr  bobbsey laughed as he got back into
bed 

there was no more disturbance that night and the twins did not again
awaken  mr  bobbsey remained awake for a while  but he heard nothing 
and he believed that if it was a man or an animal that had brushed
against the tent where freddie was sleeping  whoever  or whatever  it
was had gone far away 

dinah had a fine breakfast ready for the twins and the others the next
morning  there were flap jacks with maple syrup to pour over them  and
that  with the crisp smell of bacon  made every one so hungry that there
was no need to call even nan twice  and sometimes she liked to lie in
bed longer than did the others 

 did you find what it was that bumped me  daddy   asked freddie  as he 
as last  pushed back his plate  unable to eat any more 

 no  and we don t need to worry about it  now we must finish getting
twin camp in order to day   went on mr  bobbsey   and then we will
begin to have fun and enjoy ourselves  

 are we going to catch any fish   asked bert   always  when you read of
camps  they catch fish and fry them  

 yes  we can go fishing after we get the work done   said his father 
 work first and play afterward is a rule we ll follow here  though there
won t be much work to do  however  if we re to go fishing we ll have to
dig some bait  

 i can dig worms   cried freddie   worms are good for bait  aren t they 
daddy  

 for some kinds of fish  yes  we ll fish part of the time with worms and
see what luck we have  bert  you and freddie can dig the bait  

 i want to help   said flossie   i helped nan get out my dolls and toys 
and now i want to dig worms  

 all right  little fat fairy   laughed bert   come along  

 mercy  flossie  digging bait is such dirty work  what do you want to do
that for   asked nan 

 i don t care if it is dirty  it s fun  

 you might have known  nan   laughed mrs  bobbsey   that flossie would
not object to dirt  

with a shovel for turning up the dirt  and a tin can to hold the worms 
bert and the two smaller twins were soon busy  but they did not have as
good luck as they expected  earthworms were not plentiful on the island 
perhaps they could not swim over the lake from the main shore  freddie
suggested 

 aren t bugs good for bait   asked freddie  when he had looked in the
tin can and found only a few worms wiggling about after more than half
an hour s digging on the part of himself and bert 

 some kinds of bugs are good for fishing  yes   bert answered  and 
hearing that  freddie started back for the tent where the trunks were
stored 

 what are you going to do   bert called after his little brother 

 i m going to get the go around bugs  we can use them for bait  water
won t hurt  em  the store man told me so  we can use the go around
bugs  

 oh  they re no good  they re  tin    laughed bert 

but freddie was not listening  he had slipped into the tent and was
searching for the toys he had bought in new york  bert kept on digging
for worms  now and then finding one  which flossie picked up for him 
until he heard another call from freddie  the little fellow came running
from the tent with an empty and broken box in his hand 

 look  look   cried freddie   my go around bugs comed alive in the night
and they broke out of the box  oh  dear  now i can t have  em to catch
fish with  the go around bugs broke out of the box and they ve gone
away  




chapter xi

the blueberry boy


 what s the matter  freddie  what has happened  i hope you haven t hurt
yourself   and mrs  bobbsey  who heard the small twin calling to bert
about the tin bugs  hurried from the tent  where she was making the
beds  to see what the trouble was 

 no  momsie  i m not hurt   freddie answered   but look at my go around
bugs   and he held out the empty and broken box 

 what s the matter with them   asked mr  bobbsey who came up just then
from the shore of the lake where he had gone to make sure the camp boats
were securely tied 

 my bugs are all gone   went on freddie   they broke out of the box in
the night  they bited themselves out  

 no  they didn t bite the box   said flossie  coming up to look at what
her small brother held   they just went around and around and around 
and they knocked a hole with their heads in the box and so they got out 
did you look for them on the floor of the tent  freddie  

 no  i didn t  

 come on  we ll have a look   bert said  he dropped the shovel with
which he had been digging for worms and ran over to his little brother 
he took the box from freddie 

 that must have been smashed in the moving   bert said to his father 

 no  it wasn t smashed   freddie said  hearing what bert remarked to mr 
bobbsey   flossie and i were playing with the bugs yesterday after we
got here  and the box wasn t broken then  it was all right  and so were
the go around bugs  but now they re gone  

 maybe the box fell off a table or something   said mr  bobbsey   and
broke that way  we ll look on the floor of the tent for your bugs  my
little fat fireman  

but no bugs were to be found after a careful search had been made  and
freddie and flossie were quite disappointed 

 we can t go fishing if we can t find any bugs for to bait the hooks  
said freddie  tears in his blue eyes 

 never mind   his father answered   the tin bugs wouldn t have caught
many fish  and if we don t find your toys i ll get you some more when i
go to town  you and bert had better keep on digging the worms  i guess 
they re better for fish  

 and i ll pick  em up   offered flossie  she was a queer little child in
some ways  not afraid of bugs and  crawly things  

it did not take freddie or flossie long to forget what had made them
unhappy  and though for a time they were sorry about the loss of the
bugs  they soon became so interested in helping bert dig for worms that
they were quite jolly again 

 here s an awful fat one  flossie   cried freddie   pick that one up
just terribly careful like  i m going to save him for my hook  and maybe
i ll get the biggest fish of all  

 how ll you know where to find this one when you want it  i d like to
know  freddie bobbsey   returned his sister 

 tie a blue ribbon on it   suggested bert 

 yes  we might   said flossie slowly   maybe nan has a ribbon  i ll
ask  

bert laughed and said 

 i was just fooling  little fat fairy  i don t believe you can do that  

 i don t see why   dissented freddie   we can try  anyway  here  i have
a red string in my pocket  that ll do better than a ribbon  

he pulled out the string  and the two smaller children tied it around
the middle of the earthworm  but  much to flossie s dismay  they tied it
so tightly that it almost cut the worm in two 

 oh  freddie bobbsey  you fix that right away   cried his twin sister 
and he loosened the string 

pretty soon bert again dropped the spade he had taken up and said 

 there  freddie  you dig awhile  i want to see about the lines and
poles  we have almost worms enough  

freddie was glad to do this  and flossie was eager to pick up the
crawling creatures  bert went back to the tent to get out the poles 
lines and hooks  there he found his father and mother looking at the
broken box that had held the tin bugs 

 how do you think it became smashed   mrs  bobbsey asked 

 i don t know   answered her husband   it looks as though some one had
stepped on it  

 but who could do that  flossie and freddie think so much of the bugs
that they take good care of them  and they wouldn t put them where they
would be stepped on  do you suppose any of the men that have been
helping set up the camp could have done it  

 i hardly think so  if they did they wouldn t take the bugs away  and
that is what has happened  it seems to me as though the box had been
broken so the bugs could be taken out  for the cover fits on tightly 
and it often sticks  freddie and flossie often come to me to open it for
them  probably whoever tried to open it could not do so at first  and
then stepped on it enough to crack it open without damaging the tin bugs
inside  

 but who would do such a thing   asked mrs  bobbsey  and bert found
himself asking  in his mind  the same question 

 that s something we ll have to find out   said mr  bobbsey  and neither
of them noticed bert  who  by this time  was inside the tent where the
fishing things were kept 

 could it be the gypsies   asked mrs  bobbsey 

 well  i don t altogether believe all that talk about the gypsies   said
mr  bobbsey slowly   i think they may have taken helen s talking doll 
but that s all  however  if there are any gypsies here on the island 
and if they saw those gay red  yellow and spotted bugs of flossie s and
freddie s they might have taken them  they like those colors  and the
crawling bugs might amuse them  

 oh  but if there are gypsies on this island i don t want to stay
camping here  they might take away some of the children  flossie or
freddie  nan and bert are too old  

 nonsense   laughed mr  bobbsey   there are no gypsies here  and you
needn t worry  

 all the same i wish snap were here with us   went on mrs  bobbsey   i d
feel safer if i knew the dog were with the children all the while  as he
was before  

 well  if he doesn t come back  or if we don t find him soon  i ll get
another dog   promised mr  bobbsey   now don t worry about gypsies 
maybe this broken box was only an accident  

 but what about the shadow you saw last night  maybe that was a     

just then dinah came waddling from the cook tent toward the large one
where mr  and mrs  bobbsey stood  bert could see and hear all that went
on 

 mrs  bobbsey  did yo  take dat big piece ob bacon i cut a few slices
off of last night   asked the cook 

 why  no  dinah  i didn t   answered mrs  bobbsey   why do you ask  

  cause as how dat bacon s gone  it s done gone complete  i hung it
inside de tent  up high where none ob dem chatterin  squirrels or
chipmunks could git it  an  now  when i want some fo  dinnah it s gone 
maybe de chilluns took some fo  dere fish hooks   cause i done heah bert
talk about bait  

 no  i didn t take it   answered bert himself  stepping out of the small
tent where the poles  oars for the boats and other camp articles were
kept   we ve got worms enough for bait  

 bacon gone  eh   said mr  bobbsey  then  as he looked at his wife and
glanced at bert  he went on   well  maybe a stray dog jumped up and got
it  some dogs can jump very high  dinah  snap could  i remember  

 good land ob massy  ef i t ought dat  er snap had come back t  mah
honey lambs i d be so glad i wouldn t mind de bacon   said the fat cook 
 but i don t reckon no dog took it  mistah bobbsey  i t ink it war  a
two legged robber dat     

 never mind that now  dinah   said mrs  bobbsey quickly   come here and
finish making the beds  i want to walk down to the lake with mr 
bobbsey   and she nodded to her husband   one piece of bacon won t
matter   she went on   we have plenty more  

 yes  i knows  dat    said dinah  who was puzzled   but if no  count
folks is gwine t  come t  dish yeah camp an  walk off wif vittles dat
way     

 it s time it was stopped  isn t it   asked bert  as he walked toward
the fat cook   say  dinah   he went on as he saw his father and mother
stroll down to the shore of the lake   did you hear a queer noise in the
night  

 did i heah a queer noise around de camp las  night   repeated dinah 
 well  i suah  did   honey lamb  i done heard a owl hoot  an  dat s a
suah sign ob bad luck  

 no  i don t mean that kind of noise  dinah  did you hear anything
else  

 yas  i done heah mah man sam snore suffin  terrible  it were  most like
thunder  did you all heah dat  honey lamb  

 no  i didn t hear that  dinah   answered bert  with a laugh   but
something or somebody brushed past our tent in the night  and woke up
freddie  then my father went outside and saw some one sneaking away  

 oh  mah good lan  ob massy   cried dinah   dat s where mah bacon went
to  wait until i tells your fader  honey lamb  an      

 no  hold on  wait a minute   cried bert  catching dinah by her apron as
she was hurrying away   dad knows it already  and so does mother  i
guess they don t want to scare us children  but i m not afraid  i ll
tell you what i think  dinah  

 what s dat  

 i think there are gypsies on this island  and that they re after
flossie and freddie  

 oh  mah goodness  oh  mah goodness  oh  mah goodness   cried dinah
quickly  it seemed she could think of nothing else to say 

 but i m not afraid   went on bert   we ll just have to keep a good
watch  and not let those two little twins out of our sight  don t tell
my mother or father that you know this  you and i and nan will keep
watch  

 dat s what we will   exclaimed the fat cook   an  if dem gypsies lays
so much as a fingernail on mah honey lambs i ll pull de gold rings offen
dere ears an  frow dish water on  em  dat s what i ll do to dem
gypsies  

 i wish we had snap back  or that whisker were a dog instead of a goat  
said bert   but maybe if i let whisker roam around the camp at night
he ll be as good as a watch dog  

 he can butt wif his horns   said dinah 

 yes  and he can make a bleating noise  that s what i ll do   said bert 
 i ll use whisker as a watch dog  now don t say anything to father or
mother about our knowing there re gypsies here   went on bert 

 i won t  i won t say a word   promised dinah   but i ll keep mah ole
eyes skinned fo  flossie an  freddie  an  so will sam  it s got  t be
mighty smart gypsies dat ll take away mah honey lambs  

bert was really much excited by what he had seen and heard  the smashing
of the box  what his father and mother thought about it  the taking of
the bacon and the scare the night before  all this was quite a surprise 

 are you sure it s gypsies   asked nan when her older brother told her
what had happened 

 i m  sure  of it   said bert   now what you and i ve got to do is to
keep a good watch over flossie and freddie  course we re too big for the
gypsies to take  but they could easy walk away with those little twins  

 what d you s pose they d do with  em  bert  if they did take flossie
and freddie  

 oh  they wouldn t hurt  em  of course  they d just black up flossie s
and freddie s faces with walnut juice to make  em look dark  like real
gypsies  and they d keep  em until dad paid a lot of money to get the
twins back  

 how much money  

 oh  maybe a thousand dollars  maybe more  

 oh   exclaimed nan   then we must be sure never to let flossie or
freddie out of our sight  we ve got to watch them every minute  

 of course   agreed bert   we ll fool those gypsies yet  

carrying out their plan to be very careful of their little brother and
sister  bert and nan took the small twins in the boat with them when
they went fishing an hour later  bert would not go out far from the
shore of blueberry island  indeed  his mother had told him he must not 
for the lake was deep in places  and the older twins did about as much
watching the bushes along the bank for signs of gypsies as they did
fishing 

flossie and freddie  however  not worrying about any trouble  had lots
of fun tossing their baited hooks into the water  and freddie yelled in
delight when he caught the first fish  flossie also caught one  but it
was very small  and bert made her put it back in the lake 

the children caught enough fish for a meal  though when they started out
neither their father nor mother thought they would  but the worms proved
to be good bait 

 we d have caught bigger fish if we d had my tin bugs for bait   said
freddie 

 i don t want my bugs put on a hook   said flossie   when will you find
them  freddie  and make them go around and around  

 i don t know   he answered 

the tents were put in good order and for two or three days the children
had great sport playing  going fishing and taking walks in the woods
with their father and mother  or going for trips on the lake  there were
no more night scares 

 maybe it wasn t gypsies after all   said nan to her brother one day 

 yes  it was   he said   they were here  but they went away when they
found out we knew about them  but they ll come back  and then they may
try to take flossie or freddie  we ve got to keep a good watch  

it was about a week after they had come to blueberry island that the
bobbsey twins  all four of them  went for a ride in the goat wagon 
there was a good road which ran the whole length of the island  and
whisker could easily pull the wagon along it 

the twins had taken their lunch and were to have a sort of picnic in the
woods  they rode under the green trees  stopped to gather flowers  and
nan made a wreath of ferns which she put over whisker s horns  making
him look very funny  indeed  then the twins found a nice grassy spot
near a spring of water  and sat down to eat the good things dinah had
put up for their lunch 

freddie had taken one bite of a chicken sandwich when  all of a sudden 
there was a noise in the bushes near him  and a queer face peered out 
freddie gave one look at it  and  dropping his piece of bread and
chicken  cried 

 oh  it s a blueberry boy  it s a blueberry boy  oh  look  




chapter xii

the drifting boat


at first nan and bert did not know whether freddie was playing some
trick or not  flossie had gone down to the spring to get a cupful of
water  and so was not near her little brother when he gave the cry of
alarm 

but bert looked up and had a glimpse of what had startled freddie 
certainly there was a queer  blue face staring at the three twins from
over the top of the bushes  and the face did not go away as they looked
at it 

 a blueberry boy  what in the world is a blueberry boy   asked nan 

 there he is   cried freddie  pointing   he s been picking blueberries 
that s why i call him a blueberry boy  

 yes  and he s been eating them  too  i guess   added bert   did you
want anything of us   he asked of the stranger 

by this time flossie had come back with the water  that is  what she had
not spilled of it  and she  too  saw the strange boy 

 who are you   she asked 

 my name s tom   was the answer   what s yours  

 flossie bobbsey  an  i m a twin an  we re campin  on this island  and
we had some bugs that went around and around and     

 flossie  come here   called nan  she did not want her little sister to
talk too much to the strange boy  nan had an idea the boy might belong
to the gypsies 

 i saw him first   put in freddie   i saw his face all covered with
blueberries  and i dropped my standwich  i did  

he began looking on the ground for what he had been eating  but finding 
when he picked up the bread and bits of chicken  that ants were crawling
all over the  standwich   he tossed it away again 

 aw  what d you do that for   asked tom  the blueberry boy   that was
good to eat  ain t you hungry  

 yes  but i don t like ants   returned freddie    sides  there s more
to eat in the basket  

 cracky   exclaimed tom   that s fine  there isn t anything in  my 
basket but blueberries  and not many of them  you get tired of eatin 
 em after a while  too  

 are you  are you hungry   asked bert  as yet no one else had appeared
except the boy  he seemed to be all alone  and he was not much larger
than bert 

 hungry  you d better believe i m hungry   answered the boy with a laugh
that showed his white teeth with his blueberry stained lips and face all
around them   i thought i d have a lot of berries picked by noon  so i
could row back to shore  sell  em and get somethin  to eat  but the
berries ain t as ripe as i thought they d be  it s too early i guess  so
i ve got to go hungry  

nan whispered something to bert who nodded 

 we ve got more sandwiches here   bert said to the blueberry boy   would
you like one  

 would i  like  one   asked the boy  who seemed to answer one question
by asking another like it   say  you just give me a chance  i ain t had
nothin  since breakfast  and there wasn t much of that  

with a bound he jumped through the bushes and stood in the little grassy
glade where the bobbsey twins were having a sort of picnic by
themselves  they saw that tom had on ragged clothes and no shoes 
indeed  he looked like a very poor boy  but his face  though it was
stained with the blueberries he had eaten  was smiling and kind  the
bobbsey twins thought they would like him 

 here  eat this   and bert held out some sandwiches  dinah had put in
plenty  as she always did 

 and he can have some cake  too   said freddie   i don t want but two
pieces  and i told dinah to put in three for me  

 oh  what a hungry boy   laughed nan 

 and the blueberry boy can have one of my pieces of cake   said flossie 
 where did you get the blueberries   she asked  looking into his basket 

 i didn t get many  that s the trouble   he said   it s a little too
early for them  but the earlier they are the better price you can sell
 em for  so i came over alone to day  

 where do you live   asked bert  as the boy was hungrily eating the
sandwich 

 over in freedon   and tom turner  for such he said was his name 
pointed to a village on the other side of the lake from that where the
bobbsey twins had their home   our folks come here every year to pick
blueberries  but never as early as this  i guess i ve had my trouble for
nothing  i ve eaten more berries than i put in my basket  i guess  but i
was so hungry i had to have something  i didn t find many ripe ones at
that  and i guess i got as much outside of me as i did inside   and he
laughed again  showing his white teeth 

 where do you folks live   tom asked  as he took a piece of cake nan
offered him 

 we re camping on this island  

 you don t mean to say you are gypsies  do you   asked the blueberry boy
in surprise 

 no  of course not   bert answered   we live in lakeport  bobbsey is our
name and     

 oh  does your father have a lumberyard  

 yes  

 oh  well  then you re all right  my father drives one of your father s
lumber wagons  he just got that job this week  been out of work a long
while  i heard him say he had a place in the bobbsey lumberyard  but i
never thought i d meet you  i thought maybe you was gypsies at first  

 that s what i thought you were   said nan 

 we re going to be gypsies when we get older  freddie and me   announced
flossie 

 no  we re not  flossie  we re going to be in a circus  

 oh  yes  and i m going to ride a horse standing up  

 and i m going to be a clown     

 and he ll have his little fire engine     

 and squirt water on the other clowns and     

 and the folks ll holler and laugh  and i m going to have a
glittery     

 dear me  flossie and freddie  we ve heard all about that at least a
dozen times lately   protested bert 

 but tom hasn t heard about it  he s int rested   declared freddie 

 i knew a feller once that had been in a circus   said tom   he said
they had to work awful hard  there s the show every afternoon and every
night and the parade in the mornin  and the practisin  and gettin 
ready  he said too that the fellers at the head of the show was awful
strict about how everybody behaved themselves  it wasn t much fun  he
said  and it was lots of work  

 my   gasped freddie   i  i guess we ll be gypsies  i don t like to
work  much  

 that is  not very much   agreed flossie 

 are there any gypsies here   asked bert  for he thought it would be a
good chance to find out what he wanted to know 

 yes  there are some   was tom s unexpected answer   they had a camp on
the lower end of the island last week  i expected to see some of  em
to day  they re great blueberry pickers  and that s one reason i came
early  most always the gypsies get the best of the blueberries  fore we
white folks have a chance  

 are there gypsies on this island now   asked nan  looking over her
shoulder into the bushes  as though she feared a dark faced man  with
gold rings in his ears  might step out any moment and make a grab for
flossie or freddie 

 well  i guess they re here now   less they ve gone   said tom   i saw
some of the men and women here day before yesterday  they had been over
to the mainland buyin  things from the store  and they rowed over here 
i d come to look for blueberries  but there wasn t as many ripe as there
is to day  though that isn t sayin  much  but the gypsies are here all
right  

 then we d better go   said nan to bert 

 why   tom asked 

 because   said nan slowly   we don t like gypsies  they might take     

 they took helen s talking doll   exclaimed flossie   she cried about
it  too  i would if they d take my doll  only i got her hid under my
bed  you won t tell the gypsies  will you  

 no  indeed   laughed tom   you re afraid of them  are you   he asked
nan 

 yes  a little   she said slowly 

 they won t hurt you   tom said   they re not very fond of workin   and
they ll take anything they find lyin  around loose  but they won t hurt
nobody  

 they took helen s doll   said freddie  who had finished his two pieces
of cake   and maybe they got my bugs that go around and around     

 and around  they go around three times   put in flossie 

 i was going to say that  only you didn t wait   cried freddie   but
we ve got a goat   he went on   and he s almost as good as snap  our
dog  and maybe the gypsies got him  

 my  you don t think of anything but gypsies   said tom with a laugh 
 i m not worried about them  if i see any of  em on the island i ll ask
 em if they have your dog and bugs  

 and helen s doll   added flossie   she wants mollie back  

 i ll ask about that   promised tom   you ve been awful good to me  and
i d like to do you a favor  i know some of the gypsy boys  

 i guess i ll tell my father they re camping on this island   said bert 

 let s go tell him now   suggested nan   we ve stayed here long enough  

 and i guess i ll row back to the mainland   added tom   there s no use
waiting here for the blueberries to get ripe  i ll come next week  

he walked back a little way with the bobbsey twins to where he had left
his boat  then he was soon rowing across the lake  waving his hand to
his new friends  his white teeth showing between his berry stained lips 

 he s a nice boy  that blueberry boy   said freddie   i saw him first  i
did  

mr  bobbsey nodded his head thoughtfully when the twins  taking turns 
told him what tom had told them 

 gypsies on the island  eh   remarked mr  bobbsey   well  i suppose they
think they have a right to camp here  but i ll see about it  maybe some
of them are all right  but i don t like the idea of staying here if the
place is going to be overrun with them  i must see about it  

for the next few days and nights a close watch was kept about twin camp 
but no gypsies were seen  nor did any more blueberry pickers come 
indeed  the fruit was not ripe enough  as the bobbseys could tell by
looking at some bushes which grew near their tents 

it was about a week after this  when mr  bobbsey had gone to lakeport
one morning on business  that flossie and freddie went down to the shore
of the lake not far from their camp 

as they looked across the water they saw drifting toward the island an
empty rowboat  there was no one in it  as they could tell  and the wind
was sending it slowly along 

 it s got loose from some dock   said freddie  who knew more about boats
than most boys of his age 

 maybe it ll come here and we can get it   said flossie   let s throw
stones at it  

 no  that would only scare it away   said freddie   wait till it gets
near enough  and then i ll wade out and poke it in with a stick  

so the two little twins waited on shore for the drifting boat to come to
them 




chapter xiii

in the cave


 look out  freddie  don t you go wadin  too far   cried flossie  as she
saw her little brother kick off his low shoes  quickly roll off his
stockings  and start out toward the boat which now a strong puff of wind
had blown quite close to the island shore 

 i ll be careful   he answered   mother said i could wade up as far as
the wig wag cut on my leg  and i m not there yet  

freddie had several scars and scratches on his legs  reminders of
accidents he had suffered at different times  one scar was from a cut
which he had got when he had fallen over the lawn mower about a year
before  it was the biggest cut of all  and was near his right knee  he
called it his  wig wag  cut  because it was a sort of wavy scar  and
when he wanted to go in wading his mother always told him never to go
in water that would come above that cut  else he would get his
knickerbockers wet 

so now he was careful not to go out too far  he watched the water rising
slowly up on his bare legs as he waded along on the sandy bottom of the
lake toward the drifting boat 

 if you took a stick you could reach it now   called flossie 

 i guess i could   freddie said 

 i ll hand you a stick   flossie offered  looking for one along the
shore  there were many dead branches  blown from the trees  and she soon
handed freddie a long one  with it the little boy was able slowly to
pull the boat toward him  and he had soon shoved the  nose   as he
sometimes called the bow  against the bank of the island 

 now i can get in   laughed flossie   and i won t have to take off my
shoes and stockings either   and into the boat she scrambled 

 oh   exclaimed freddie   are you going to get in the boat  

 i am in   answered his sister   aren t you comin  in  too  

freddie looked at the boat  at his sister  at the lake  and at his
shoes and stockings on the shore  then he said 

 well  it doesn t belong to us  this boat don t  

 i know   said flossie   but you pulled it to shore and we can keep it
till somebody comes for it  and we can make believe have a ride in it 
momsie won t care as long as it s fast to the shore  come on  freddie  

it seemed all right to freddie when flossie said this  especially as the
boat was close against the shore  he put on his shoes and stockings 
drying his feet in the grass  and then he took his seat in the boat
beside his little sister 

 now we ll play going on a long voyage   she said   we ll take a trip to
new york and maybe we ll be shipwrecked  

 like tommy todd s father   added freddie 

 yep  just like him   said flossie   only make believe  of course  

 and i ll be captain of the ship  and you can be a sailor   went on
freddie   it ll be lots of fun  

bert and nan had gone riding in the goat wagon to the other end of the
island  mr  bobbsey was at his office and mrs  bobbsey  with dinah  was
working about twin camp  so there was no one to watch flossie and
freddie  mrs  bobbsey supposed they were playing safely at the lake
shore  and  as a matter of fact  they were on shore  though in the boat 

 i wonder whose it is   said freddie  when they had made a make believe
voyage safely to new york  after having been shipwrecked at
philadelphia  a place the little twins remembered  as one of their aunts
lived in that city 

 maybe it s a gypsy boat   said freddie 

 or else it s the one the blueberry boy had   added his sister 

 oh  yes  maybe it is his   cried freddie   and if it is  didn t we
better ought to take it to him  

 how   asked flossie 

 why  we can push it along the shore with sticks   cause there s no oars
in it  and when we see him picking blueberries we can holler to him to
come an  get his boat  

flossie thought this over a few seconds  then she said 

 let s  

this meant she would do as freddie said  the twins did not stop to
consider whether they were doing something they ought not to do  they
planned to keep near shore  and that was as much as they remembered of
what their mother had told them  that they were not to go out on the
lake in any boat without her permission or their father s 

 but paddling along the shore isn t going out   said freddie   anyhow 
mother and father would want us to give back the boat to the blueberry
boy  wouldn t they  

 course   said flossie   get another stick  freddie  and we can poke the
boat along  and we won t have to go far out at all  

in a little while the two twins were shoving the drifted boat along the
shore by pushing the ends of their sticks into the soft bank  the boat
was of good size  and it was flat bottomed  which meant it would not
easily tip over  flossie and freddie each knew how to row  though they
had to have oars made especially for them  but they knew how to keep in
the middle of a boat  and never thought of rocking it or changing seats 
so they were much safer than most children of their age would have been 

having lived near lake metoka all their lives  they knew more about
boats and water than perhaps some of you small boys and girls do  and
they could both swim  though  of course not very far  nor were they
allowed to try it in deep water 

 oh  this is lots of fun   cried flossie  as she and freddie poled the
boat along   this is real trav lin   

 but we mustn t go too far   said freddie  not quite sure whether or not
his mother would think what he and his sister were doing was just right 
 as soon as we see the blueberry boy we must give him his boat and go
back home  

 if he wants to row us back  can t we let him   asked flossie 

 yes  but he can t row   cause there are no oars in the boat   said
freddie 

 maybe he has  em with him  i guess that s what happened   went on the
little girl   you know we take the oars out of our boat and put them up
on shore  and then maybe the blueberry boy forgot to tie his boat  

 and it blew away and we found it   finished freddie   come on  push
hard  flossie  let s go fast and make believe we re a steamboat  

that suited flossie  and they were soon pushing the boat along the shore
quite fast  they went out past a little point on the island  some
distance away from their own camp  the white tents of which they could
see 

 oh  how nice the wind is blowing   cried flossie  after a bit   i don t
hardly have to push at all  freddie  

 that s good   he said   we ll be a sailboat instead of a steamboat  if
we only had a sail now  

 maybe you could hold up your coat   suggested his sister   don t you
remember that shipwreck story mother read us  the men in the boat held
up a blanket for a sail  we haven t any blanket  but if you held one end
of your coat and i held the other it would be a sail  

 we ll do it   cried freddie  as he slipped off his jacket  it was
small  but when he and his sister held it crosswise of the boat  the
wind  which had begun to blow harder  sent the boat along faster than
the children had been pushing it 

 oh  this is fine   freddie cried   i m glad we played this game 
flossie  

 so m i  but look how far out we are  freddie   flossie suddenly cried 
 we can t reach shore with our sticks  

freddie looked and saw that this was so 

 i wonder if we can touch bottom out here   he said   i m going to try  

he let go of his coat  and as it happened that flossie did the same
thing  the little jacket was blown into the water 

 oh   cried flossie   oh  oh  

 i can get it   excitedly shouted freddie   i ll reach it with my
pushing stick  

he managed to do this  taking care not to lean too far over the edge so
the boat would not tip  then he caught the coat on the end of the stick
and pulled his jacket into the boat 

 oh  it s all wet   cried flossie 

freddie did not stop to tell her that every time anything fell into the
water it got wet  instead  he began to search in his pockets 

 what s the matter  did you lose something   asked flossie 

 i guess we can eat  em after they dry out   said freddie  after a bit 
pulling out some soaked sugar cookies 

freddie spread them out on one of the boat seats where the sun would dry
them  and then he wrung from his coat as much water as he could  next he
spread the jacket out to dry  flossie helping him 

all this time the children failed to notice where they were going  but
when they had seen that the soaked cookies were getting dry and had
eaten them  freddie looked about and  pointing to shore  cried 

 oh  look  flossie  

 we re going right toward a big  dark hole   said the little girl 

 that isn t a hole  it s a cave   freddie said   maybe it s a pirate
cave  and there ll be gold and jewels in it  the wind is blowing us and
our boat right into it  

and that was what was happening  the wind had changed  and  instead of
blowing the boat away from the island  was blowing it toward it  and
directly in front of flossie and freddie was a big hole in the steep
bank of the island shore  as freddie had said  it was a cave  what was
in it 




chapter xiv

helen s visit


while the two children sat in the drifting rowboat  which was being
slowly blown toward the island shore again  flossie suddenly gave a
little jump  which made the boat shake 

 what s the matter   asked freddie   did something bite you   for his
sister had started  just as you might do if a fly or a mosquito suddenly
nipped your leg 

 no  nothing bit me   she answered   but i felt a splash of rain on my
nose and     oh  freddie  look  it s going to be a thunder lightning
storm  

freddie  whose eyes had seen nothing but the cave  now looked up at the
sky  the blue had become covered with dark clouds  and in the west there
was a dull rumble 

 i  i guess it is going to rain   said freddie slowly 

 i know it is   flossie answered   there s  nother drop  

 i felt one  too   said her brother   it went right in my eye  too   and
he winked and blinked 

 and there s another one on my nose   cried flossie   oh  freddie  what
are we going to do  i haven t an umbrella  

for a moment the little boy did not know what to do  he looked at his
coat  but that was still wet  though it had been spread out on the seat
to dry  he could not wrap that around flossie  as he thought at first he
might 

the wind  too  was blowing harder now  and there were little waves
splashing against the side of the boat  but the wind did one good thing
for the children  it blew the boat toward shore so much faster  and
shore was where they wanted to be just now  they knew they had drifted
out too far  and they were beginning to be afraid  the shore of the
island looked very safe and comfortable 

 we can get under a tree  that will be an umbrella for us   said
flossie   aren t you glad we re going on shore  freddie  

 yes  but i guess we can get in a better place out of the rain than
under a tree  flossie  

 then we d better get   she said    cause it s rainin  hard now  i ve
got about ten splashes on my nose  

the big drops were beginning to fall faster  the clouds had quickly
spread over the sky  which was now very dark  and the wind kept on
blowing 

 where can we go out of the storm   asked the little girl 

 huh  

 where we goin   freddie  

 in there   answered her brother  pointing 

 what  in that dark hole  

 it isn t a hole  it s a cave  an  maybe we ll find gold and diamonds in
there  like in the book momsie read to us  come on  we can go into the
cave  and we won t get wet at all  i ll take care of you  

 i  i m not afraid   said flossie slowly   but i wish snap was with us 
or whisker  i guess whisker would like a cave  

 so would snap   said freddie   but we can t get  em now  so we ve got
to go in ourselves  come on  and look out   cause the boat s goin  to
bump  

and bump the boat did  a second later  against the shore of the island 
close to the open mouth of the black cave  it was raining hard now  and
freddie helped flossie out of the boat  and then  holding each other by
the hand  the children ran toward the cavern  no matter what was in it 
there they would be sheltered from the rain they thought 

the cave  as freddie and flossie saw  could be entered from either the
land or the water  at one side it was so low that a boat could be rowed
into it for a little way  on the other one could walk into it by a
little path that led through the trees  the water of the lake splashed
into the cave a short distance  and then came to an end  making a sort
of little bay  or cove  large enough for two or three boats  and the
cave  as the children could see when their eyes became used to the
darkness  was quite a large one 

 i wonder if anybody lives here   whispered flossie  as she kept close
to her brother 

 we live here now   he said   anyhow  we re going to stay here till the
rain stops  

 maybe a bear lives here   said flossie in a whisper 

 pooh   laughed freddie   there are no bears on blueberry island  or
daddy would have brought a gun  and he said i didn t even need my
popgun   cause there wasn t a thing here to shoot  but i did bring my
popgun  

 you haven t got it here now  though   said flossie 

 i know i haven t  i left it in the tent by the go around bugs  i mean
before the go around bugs got away  but my popgun is there  i saw it 
only i haven t it now  so i can t shoot anything  but there s nothing to
shoot  anyhow   freddie added the last for fear his sister might be
frightened in the dark cave 

it was very dark  especially back in the end  where flossie and freddie
could see nothing  but by looking toward the place where they had come
in  they could see daylight and the lake  which was now quite rough on
account of the wind  they could also see the rain falling and
splashing 

 i m glad we re in here   said flossie   it s better than an umbrella  

 lots better   agreed freddie   if we had some cookies to eat we could
stay here a long time  and live here  

 we couldn t sleep   cause we haven t any beds   declared flossie 

 we could make beds of dried grass the way bert told us to do if we went
camping  

 but have you any more cookies   asked flossie  going back to what her
brother had first spoken of   i m hungry  

 only some crumbs   freddie said  as he put his hand in the pockets of
his coat   and they re all soft and wet  we can t eat  em  

 well  we can go home when it stops raining   said flossie   an 
dinah ll give us lots to eat  

the two children were not frightened now  they stood in the cave  and
looked out at the storm  it was raining harder than ever  and the
thunder seemed to shake the big hole in the ground  while the lightning
flashes lighted up the cave so freddie and flossie could look farther
back into it 

but they could not see much  and if there was any one or anything in the
cave besides themselves  they did not know it  they saw the boat blown
inside the cave  and it came to rest in the little cove  which was a
sort of harbor 

then  almost as quickly as it had started  the storm stopped  the wind
ceased blowing  the rain no longer fell  the thunder rumbled no more and
the lightning died out  for a few minutes longer flossie and freddie
stayed in the cave  and then  as they were about to go out  the little
girl grasped her brother by the arm and cried 

 hark  did you hear that  

 what   asked freddie 

 a noise  like something growling  

freddie looked back over his shoulder into the dark part of the cave 
then  speaking as boldly as possible  he answered 

 i didn t hear it  anyhow  i guess it was the wind  come on  we ll go
home  

 are we going back in the boat   flossie asked 

 i guess not   freddie replied   it ll be rough out on the lake  it
always is after a storm  we can walk down the path to our camp  besides 
this isn t our boat  maybe it belongs here and we d better leave it  

 then you d better tie it   said flossie  she and her brother had been
told something of the care of boats  and one rule their father had given
them was always to tie a boat when they got out of it  in the excitement
of the storm the children had forgotten this at first  but now flossie
remembered it 

 yes  i ll tie the boat   freddie said   and then whoever owns it can
come and get it  

it did not take him long to scramble around to the edge of the little
cove  once there  he tied the rope of the boat fast to a large stone
that was half buried in the ground  making sure it would not slip off 
freddie came back to where flossie waited for him 

she was quite ready to leave the cave  and soon the two children were
outside under the trees that still were dripping with rain 

the sun was now shining  flossie and freddie had had an adventure  they
thought  and that was fun for them 

 which way is home  i mean where our camp is   asked flossie  as she and
freddie walked along together 

 down this way   he said   see the path  

certainly there was a path leading away from the cave  but freddie did
not stop to think it might lead somewhere else than to twin camp  it was
a nice  smooth path  though  and he and flossie set out along it not at
all worried 

 i m hungry   said the little girl   and i want to get home as soon as i
can  

 i m hungry  too   freddie said   we ll soon be home  

but the children might not have reached the camp soon  only that a
little later they heard their names called in the wood  and  answering 
they found nan and bert looking for them in the goat wagon drawn by
whisker 

 where in the world have you been   asked bert of his little brother and
sister 

 oh   answered freddie   we ve been out in a boat and in a cave and we
only had cookies to eat and they were wet and     

 we heard a noise in the cave  maybe it s a bear  an  if it is freddie
can take his popgun the next time we go there  can t you  freddie  

 dear me   laughed nan   what s it all about  

then the two small twins told more slowly what had happened to them  and
nan and bert told their small brother and sister that  coming back from
their little trip  they had found mrs  bobbsey much worried because she
could not find flossie and freddie 

 then it began to rain   said nan   and we were all as worried as could
be  we looked at our boats  and when we found they were tied at the dock
we didn t think you were out on the water  then when it stopped raining
bert and i started out to find you and so did sam  though he went a
different way  

 and we called and called to you   said bert   didn t you hear us
shouting  

 maybe that was the noise we heard in the cave   said freddie to his
sister 

 what about this cave   asked bert   tell us where it is  

then  riding back to camp in the goat wagon  the two small twins told
again of the big hole in which they had taken refuge from the storm 

 i d like to see that   bert said   we ll go there to morrow  

 we can walk there  or whisker can take us   said freddie   and then we
can come home in the boat  but you ll have to take some oars  bert  

 that s so  there  is  a boat   exclaimed the older bobbsey boy   i
wonder whose it can be  

but they did not learn at once  for the next day  when they all went to
the cave  including mr  and mrs  bobbsey  the boat was not there 

 somebody untied it and took it away   said freddie  as he pointed out
the rock to which he had made fast the rope 

 are you sure you tied it tightly   asked his father 

 yep  i made the same kind of knot you showed me   and freddie told how
he had done it  flossie  too  was sure her brother had fastened the boat
properly 

 well  then somebody s been here in the cave   said bert   say  it s a
big place  daddy  can t we get a lantern and see where it goes to back
there   and he motioned to the dark part 

 some time  maybe  but not now   said mr  bobbsey  who  with his wife 
had walked along the island path to the cave while the children rode in
the goat wagon   i didn t know there was a cave on blueberry island  i
don t believe many persons know it is here  but the boat might belong to
some of the berry pickers  and they hunted for it until they found it  

 did the blueberry pickers make the funny noise in the cave   asked
flossie 

 i don t know   replied her father   i don t hear any noise now  i
presume it was only the wind  

mr  bobbsey and bert  lighting matches  went a short way back into the
cave  but they could see very little  and the children s father said
they would look again some other day 

 but  flossie and freddie  you mustn t come here alone again   said mr 
bobbsey 

 if it rains and we re near here can t we come in if we haven t an
umbrella   asked freddie 

 well  yes  perhaps if it rains  but you mustn t go out in a drifting
boat again  rain or no rain   ordered mr  bobbsey 

flossie and freddie promised they would not  as they always did  and
then the camping family started back for their tents 

 what do you think of that cave  the boat s being taken and all that s
happened   asked mrs  bobbsey in a whisper of her husband  as they
walked toward camp together 

 i don t know what to think   he said slowly 

 do you suppose the gypsies could be in there  

 well  they might  but don t let the children know  they are having a
good time here and there s no need  as yet  to frighten them  

for the next few days there were happy times in twin camp  the children
went on many rides in the goat wagon and had other fun  then  one
afternoon when they were all sitting near the tents waiting for dinah to
get dinner  they saw a steamer heading toward the little dock 

 oh  maybe it s company   cried flossie  clapping her hands 

and so it proved  for when the boat landed mrs  porter and her little
girl  helen  got off 

 we came to see how you were   said mrs  porter   helen wanted a trip on
the water  so we came on the excursion boat  we re going back this
evening  how are you  

 very well  indeed   said mrs  bobbsey   and glad to see you  helen can
play with flossie and freddie  

 did you see any of the gypsies  and did they have my talking doll  
asked helen as soon as she had taken off her hat in the tent and had
gone outside to play with the two small bobbsey twins 




chapter xv

the doll s dress


 haven t you got your lost doll back yet   asked freddie  as he moved
over on a board  nailed between two trees  to make room for helen to sit
down between him and flossie 

 no  i haven t found mollie   answered the little girl  who had come to
visit her friends   i guess she s a gypsy by this time  

 helen  are you sure a gypsy man took your doll   asked nan  who had
been sent out by her mother to see if the little ones were all right 

 yes  i m sure   answered helen   i left her in the yard  and  besides 
didn t johnnie marsh and me both see the gypsy man runnin  off with
her  

 well  maybe it did happen that way   said nan   but what makes you
think we might have seen that gypsy man here  helen  

  cause johnnie marsh said gypsies were camped on blueberry island  

 we haven t seen any yet   remarked bert  who had come out to ask the
little girl visitor about some of his boy friends in lakeport 

 maybe they re hiding  cause they ve got helen s doll   said flossie 
 and maybe they re in the cave freddie and i found  

 did you find a cave   asked helen   my mamma read me a story once about
a cave and a giant that lived in it  did your cave have a giant inside  

 it had a noise   answered flossie excitedly   me and freddie heard it 
but we didn t go see what it was  are you hungry  helen   she asked 
suddenly changing the subject 

 yes  i am  i only had some cake and ice cream on the boat  

 we re goin  to have ice cream   freddie cried   sam chopped up the ice
this morning and i heard him turning the freezer  i wish dinner would
hurry up and be ready  

it was not long after this that fat dinah rang the gong which told that
the meal was cooked  and soon they were all seated in the dining tent
making merry over it  mrs  porter told how helen had been teasing  ever
since the bobbseys had come to blueberry island  to be brought for a
visit 

 she says that maybe the gypsies who took her doll are here   went on
mrs  porter   though i tell her she will never see mollie again  but
helen begged hard to come  and so  here we are  

 and we re very glad to see you   said mrs  bobbsey   can t you stay
longer than just until this evening  

 no  not this time  as we didn t bring any extra clothes with us  but
helen might come later for a visit of a few days  

 oh  yes  please let her come   begged flossie 

 we ll see   said mrs  porter   did you find snap   she asked bert 

 no  we haven t heard anything of him  i was going to ask if you had  
and he looked anxiously at helen s mother 

 no  i haven t heard a word about your pet   answered mrs  porter 
 though i ve asked all your boy friends  and so has helen  tommy todd
and the others say they are keeping watch for snap  and if they see him
they ll let you know  has anything else happened since you ve been
here   she asked mr  and mrs  bobbsey 

 nothing much   answered nan s mother   we have had a lovely time
camping  and     

 flossie s and my go around bugs broke out of their box   cried freddie 
and then he begged his mother s pardon for interrupting her when she was
speaking  his mother smiled  excused him  and then she let him and
flossie  in turn  tell about the missing bugs 

 come on  we ll play hide and go to seek   proposed flossie after
dinner  while her father and mother and mrs  porter were still sitting
about the table talking   do you and nan want to play  bert   she asked
her older brother 

 no  flossie   he answered with a smile   i m going to help sam cut wood
for the campfire  we re going to have a marshmallow roast to night  

 oh  i just wish i could stay   cried helen   i love roast
marshmallows  

 we ll roast some when you come again   said nan  who was going to do
some sewing  so she could not play with the smaller children just then 
soon the game of hide and go to seek began 

freddie said he would hide first  and let both girls hunt for him  he
thought he could hide so well that he could fool them both  and still
get  home safe  before they spied him 

so while flossie and helen  blinded  by hiding their faces in their arms
against a tree  freddie stole quietly off to hide  he found a good place
behind a pile of brush wood  and there he cuddled up in a little bunch
and waited  after calling  coop    until he heard the two girls
searching for him 

by peeping through the brush freddie could see helen and his sister
looking all about for him  behind trees  down back of fallen logs  and
in clumps of ferns 

then freddie saw the girls go far enough away from  home   which was a
big oak tree  so that he thought he would have a chance to run in
 free  

this he did  and how surprised flossie and helen were when they saw him
dash out from the pile of brush wood 

 i ll blind now and let you hide   said freddie  though if the game was
played by the rules it would be his turn to hide again  as he had not
been caught 

so this time the little boy hid his head in his arms and began counting
up to a hundred by fives  and when he had called out loudly 
 ninety five  one hundred  ready or not  i m coming   he opened his eyes
and began searching 

freddie had to be more careful about going away from the  home  tree
than had the two little girls  either one of them could have spied him
and have run to touch  home  before he did  but freddie was all alone
hunting for his sister and helen  and when he had his back turned one or
the other might run in ahead of him 

 but i ll find  em   he told himself   i ll spy  em both and then it
will be my turn to hide again  

meanwhile  flossie and helen were well hidden  flossie had found two
logs lying on a pile of leaves  not far from the  home  tree  and she
had crawled down in between them pulling leaves over her  only her nose
stuck out  so she could breathe  and no one could have seen her until
they were very close 

helen had picked out a hollow stump in which to hide  it was deep enough
for her to get inside  and the bottom was covered with old leaves  so it
was soft and not very dirty  helen had been given an old dress of
flossie s to put on to play in  so she would not soil her own white one 

 i m going to have a good place to hide   thought helen  as she climbed
up on a pile of stones outside the old stump and jumped down inside 
crouching there 

then she waited for freddie to come to find her  and as there was a
crack in the stump  she could look out and see where he was  as soon as
he got far enough away from  home   flossie  who was nearer the oak
tree  would run in free   and then she would try to reach it 

meanwhile she crouched in the hollow stump  trying not to laugh or cough
or sneeze  for if she did that freddie would hear and know where she
was  helen saw something white in the stump with her  at first she
thought it was a piece of paper  but when she picked it up she knew it
was cloth  and as she looked at it her eyes grew big with wonder 

without stopping to think that she was playing the hide and go to seek
game helen suddenly stood up in the hollow stump  her head and waist
showing above the edge like a jack in the box  in her hand she held the
white thing she had found 

flossie  from her hiding place between the two logs  could look over and
see what helen was doing  seeing her standing up in plain sight flossie 
in a loud whisper  called to her friend 

 get down  get down  freddie will see you and then you ll be it  get
down  

 but look  look at what i found  in the hollow stump   answered helen 
 oh  i must show you  

 no  get down   cried flossie  pulling more leaves over herself   here
comes freddie  he ll see you  

the little boy was coming from the  home  tree  he caught sight of
helen  and cried 

 tit tat  helen  tit tat  helen  i see her in the hollow stump  

 i don t care if i am it   helen answered   look what i found  

 what is it   asked flossie  sitting up amid the leaves 

 it s the dress mollie wore when the gypsy took her away   exclaimed
helen   oh  my doll must be somewhere on this island   and holding the
white object high above her head she ran toward flossie 




chapter xvi

snoop is missing


the children suddenly lost interest in the game of hide and go to seek 
freddie thought no more of spying flossie or helen  flossie no longer
cared about hiding down between the two logs  and helen did not care
about anything but the white dress she was holding up as she scrambled
out of the hollow stump 

 it s my doll s dress   she said over and over again   it s my lost
doll s dress  

 are you sure   asked flossie  as she shook the leaves from her dress
and hair  and came over to her friend 

 course i m sure   answered helen   look  here s a place where i mended
the dress after mollie tore it when she was playing with grace lavine s
dollie one day  

mollie hadn t really torn her dress  helen had done it herself lifting
her pet out of the doll carriage  but she liked to pretend the doll had
done it 

 let s see the torn place   said flossie  and helen showed where a hole
had been sewed together 

 i  member it   helen went on    cause i sewed it crooked  i can sew
better now  it s my doll s dress all right  

 it s all wet   said freddie  who  though a boy  was not too old to be
interested in dolls  though he did not play with them   maybe the
gypsies live around here   he went on   and they washed your doll s
dress and hung it on the stump to dry  

 maybe   agreed helen  who was ready to believe anything  now that she
had found something belonging to her doll 

 no gypsies live around here   said flossie    cause we haven t seen
any  but maybe they live in the cave  

 the cave s far off   said freddie   but it s funny about that dress  

 i  i found it when i hid in the stump   explained the little visiting
girl   first i thought it was a piece of paper  but as soon as i
touched it i knew it wasn t  oh  now if i could only find mollie  

 maybe she s in the stump  too   freddie said   if the gypsies washed
her dress they d have to cover her up with leaves or bark so she
wouldn t get cold while her dress was drying  

 the gypsies didn t wash her dress   said helen 

 how do you know   asked flossie 

  cause nobody washes dresses an  makes  em all up in a heap an  puts
 em in a hollow stump   helen went on   you ve got to hang a dress
straight on a line to make it dry  

 that s so   added flossie   you only roll a dress up the way this one
was rolled when you sprinkle it to iron  don t you  helen  

 yep  oh  i do wish i could find my mollie  

 well  she must be somewhere around here if she isn t in the stump  
insisted freddie   if the gypsies took off her dress they must have
dropped the doll  let s look  

this was what the two little girls wanted to do  so with freddie to help
they began poking about with sticks in the leaves that were piled
around the stump  they searched for some time  but could find no trace
of the lost doll 

 we d better go and tell my mamma and your mamma   said flossie   maybe
they ll get a policeman and he ll find the gypsies and your dollie 
helen  

 all right  come on  

out of breath  the children ran to the tents where mrs  porter was just
thinking about going in search of her little girl  as it was nearly time
for the steamboat to come back for them 

 oh  i found mollie s dress  i found mollie s dress   cried helen 
waving it over her head 

 it was in a stump   added freddie 

 and it was all wet from bein  rained on  i guess   said flossie  for
indeed the doll s dress was still damp  and very likely it had been out
in the rain  that stump would hold water for some time  like a big 
wooden pitcher 

mrs  porter was very much surprised to hear the news  and thought
perhaps her little girl was mistaken  but when she had looked carefully
at the dress  she knew it was one she herself had made for helen when
that little girl was a baby 

 but how did it come on this island   she asked 

 it must have been dropped by the gypsies   said mr  bobbsey   in spite
of what they said to us some one of them must have picked up the doll
and carried her away for some little gypsy girl  and the gypsies must
have been on this island  some of the blueberry pickers said they saw
them  but when i looked i could not find them  by that time they must
have gone away  

 and did they take my doll with them   asked helen 

 well  i m afraid they did   said mr  bobbsey   if they wanted your pet
badly enough to take her away so boldly  as they did from the yard 
they d probably keep her  once they had her safe  it isn t every day
they can get a talking doll  you know  

 i wish there was some way of getting helen s doll back   said mrs 
porter   she does nothing but wish for her every day  she has other
dolls     

 but i liked mollie best   helen said   i want her  if she only knew i
had her dress she might come to me   she added wistfully 

 she might  if she were a fairy doll   said mrs  bobbsey  as she patted
helen on the head   but we ll look as carefully as we can for your
little girl s pet  mrs  porter  if mollie is on this island we ll find
her  

 and i ll leave this dress here   said helen   so you can put it on her
when you do find her  then she won t take cold  

 i ll wash the dress and have dinah iron it for you   promised flossie 
 i can t iron very well  

 thank you   said helen   oh  i m so glad i came here  for i found part
of mollie  anyhow  

helen and her mother left blueberry island  promising to come again some
day  and flossie and freddie said they would  in the meanwhile  look as
well as they could for the lost doll 

 illustration  they toasted the soft candies over the blaze

 the bobbsey twins on blueberry island    page 175  

that night  in front of the tents  there was a marshmallow roast  the
bobbsey children  with long sticks  toasted the soft candies over the
blaze  until the marshmallows puffed out like balloons and were colored
a pretty brown  then they ate them 

flossie and freddie dropped about as many candies in the fire as they
toasted  but bert and nan at last showed the small twins how to do it 
and then freddie toasted a marshmallow for his father and flossie made
one nice and brown for her mother 

 i dropped mine in the dirt  after i cooked it   said freddie to his
father  as he came running up with the hot candy   but i guess you can
eat it  

 i ll try   laughed mr  bobbsey  and he brushed off all the dirt he
could  but had to chew the rest  for freddie stood right in front of his
father  to make sure the marshmallow was eaten 

 is it good   asked the little boy 

 fine   cried mr  bobbsey   but i can t eat any more   he said quickly 
 because i might get indigestion  

 then i ll eat  em   said freddie   i m not afraid of
id idis idisgestion  

it was jolly fun toasting candies at the campfire  but as everything
must come to an end some time  this did also  and the children went to
bed and the camp was quiet  except that now and then whisker gave a
gentle  baa a a a   from his resting place under a tree  and snoop  the
black cat  purred in his sleep 

the next day it rained  so the twins could not go to look for the doll 
as they wanted to  they had to stay around the tents  though when the
shower slackened they were allowed to go out with their rubber coats and
boots on 

toward night the sun came out  and they all went down to the dock to
meet the steamboat  for mr  bobbsey had gone over to the mainland after
dinner  to attend to some business at the lumber office  and was coming
back on the last boat 

it was after supper that dinah  coming into the dining tent to clear
away the dishes  caused some excitement when she asked 

 has any ob you all seen snoop  

 what  is our cat gone   asked bert 

 well  i hasn t seen  im since flossie an  freddie was playin  hitch him
up like a hoss to a cigar box wagon   went on dinah   he come out to me
an  i gib  im some milk  an  now  when i called  im t  come an  git his
supper  he ain t heah  

flossie and freddie looked at each other  so did nan and bert  even mr 
bobbsey seemed surprised  but he said 

 oh  i guess he just went off in the woods for a rest after flossie and
freddie mauled him when they were playing with him  go call him  bert  

so bert went out in front of the tent and called   snoop  snoop  hi 
snoop  where are you  

but no snoop answered  then flossie and freddie called  and so did nan 
while sam went farther into the woods among the trees  but the big black
cat  that the children loved so dearly  was missing  snoop did not come
to his supper that night 




chapter xvii

freddie is caught


 hark  wasn t that snoop  

 listen  everybody  

bert and nan suddenly made these exclamations as they  with the rest of
the bobbsey family  were sitting in the main tent after supper  the
lanterns had been lighted  the mosquito net drawn over the front door 
or flap of the tent  to keep out the bugs  and the camping family was
spending a quiet hour before going to bed 

bert thought he heard  in the woods outside  a noise that sounded like
that made by the missing cat snoop  and nan  also  thought she heard the
same sound 

they all listened  mr  bobbsey looking up from his book  while flossie
and freddie ceased their play  mrs  bobbsey stopped her sewing 

 there it is again   exclaimed nan  as from the darkness outside the
tent there came a queer sound 

 what is it   asked mrs  bobbsey   it doesn t sound like snoop  

 maybe it s snap   exclaimed freddie   he used to howl like that  

 it did sound a bit like a dog s howl   admitted bert   may i go out and
see what it is  daddy  

 i ll take a look   said mr  bobbsey  he stepped to the flap of the tent
and listened  the queer sound came again  and he went outside  while
bert went near the tent opening to listen  he  as well as his father 
then heard another noise  that made by some one walking across the
ground  stepping on and breaking small sticks 

 who s there   suddenly called mr  bobbsey  exactly  as bert said
afterward  like a soldier sentinel on guard   who s there  

 it s me  sam   was the answer   i done heard some queer noise  mr 
bobbsey  an  dinah said as how i d better git up and see what it was  

 oh  all right  sam  we heard it too  listen again  

sam stood still  and mr  bobbsey remained quietly outside the big tent 
sam and his wife lived in a smaller tent not far away  and they usually
went to bed early  so sam had had to get up when the queer noise
sounded 

suddenly it came again  and this time bert  who had stuck his head out
between the flaps of the tent  called 

 there it is  

 who  who  who   came the sound  and as mr  bobbsey heard it he gave a
laugh 

 nothing but an owl   he said   i should have known it at first  only i
couldn t hear well in the tent  you may go back to bed  sam  it s only
an owl  

 only an owl  mr  bobbsey  yas  i reckon as how it is  but i don t like
t  heah it jest de same  

 you don t  why not  sam  

  cause as how dey most always ginnerally bring bad luck  i don t like
de sound ob dat owl s singin  no how  

 he wasn t singing  sam   laughed bert  after he had called to the rest
of the family inside the tent and told them the cause of the noise 

 ha  am dat yo   bert   asked the colored man   well  maybe an owl don t
sing like a canary bird  but dey makes a moanful soun   an  i don t like
it  it means bad luck  dat s what it means  an  you all d better git t 
bed  

 oh  i m not afraid  sam  we thought it was snoop mewing  or snap
howling  maybe  you didn t see anything of our lost dog  did you  

 not a smitch  an  i suah would like t  hab him back  

 ask him if he or dinah saw snoop   called flossie 

bert asked the colored man this  but sam had seen nothing of the pet cat
either 

 oh  dear   sighed freddie   both our pets gone  snap and snoop  i wish
they d come back  

 maybe they will   said his mother kindly   it s time for you to go to
bed now  and maybe the morning will bring good news  snap or snoop may
be back by that time  

 that s what we ve been thinking about poor snap for a long while  
grumbled nan 

 well  i m afraid snap  is  lost for good   said mrs  bobbsey   he never
stayed away so long before  but snoop may be back in the morning  he may
have just wandered off  it isn t the first time he has been away all
night  

 only once or twice   said bert  who came back to the book he was
reading   and both times it was because he got shut by accident in
places where he couldn t get out  

 maybe that s what s happened this time   suggested nan   we ought to
look around the island  

 we will  to morrow   declared bert 

 and look in the cave flossie and i found   urged freddie   maybe snoop
is there  

 we ll look   promised his brother 

when flossie and freddie were taken to their cots by their mother 
flossie  when she had finished her regular prayers  added 

 an  please don t let  em take whisker  

 what do you mean by that  flossie   asked her mother 

 i mean i was prayin  that they shouldn t take our goat   said the
little girl 

 i want to pray that  too   cried freddie  who had hopped into bed   why
didn t you tell me you were going to pray that  flossie  

  cause it just popped into my head  but you stay in bed  an  i ll pray
it for you   and she added   please  freddie says the same thing  

then she covered herself up and almost before mrs  bobbsey had left the
sides of the cots both children were fast asleep 

 poor little tykes   said the mother softly   they do miss their pets
so  i hope the cat and dog can be found  and helen s doll  too  it s
strange that so many things are missing  i wonder who flossie meant by
 they   i must ask her  

and the next morning the little girl  when reminded of her petition the
night before and asked who she thought might take the goat  said 

 they is the gypsies  of course  they take everything  blueberry tom
said so  and i didn t want them to get whisker too  

 who in the world is blueberry tom   asked mrs  bobbsey 

 he s the boy who was so hungry   explained freddie   he came to the
island to pick early blueberries only there wasn t any  

 oh  now i remember   mrs  bobbsey said with a laugh   well  i don t
believe there are any gypsies on this island to take anything  snoop
must have just wandered off  

 then we ll find him   exclaimed nan 

during the next few days a search was made for the missing black cat 
the twins  sometimes riding in their goat wagon  and again going on
foot  went over a good part of the island  calling for snoop  but he did
not answer  sam  too  wandered about getting firewood  and also calling
for the lost pet  mr  bobbsey made inquiries of the boatmen and the man
who kept the soda water stand  but none of them had seen the children s
pet 

bert printed  with a lead pencil  paper signs  offering a reward for any
news of snoop  and these were tacked up on trees about the island so the
blueberry pickers might see them  but though many read them  none had
seen snoop  and  of course  snap was missing before the bobbseys came
to camp  so  naturally  he would not be on the island 

but in spite of the missing snap and snoop  the bobbsey twins had lots
of fun in camp  during the day they played all sorts of games  went on
long walks with their father and mother  or for trips on the lake 
sometimes they even rowed to other islands  not far from blueberry
island  and there ate their lunch 

the fishing was good  and freddie and bert often brought home a nice
mess for dinner or supper  whisker  the big white goat  was a jolly pet 
he was as gentle as a dog and never seemed to get tired of pulling the
twins in the wagon  though the roads of the island were not as smooth as
those in lakeport 

but though the twins had fun  they never gave over thinking that  some
day  they would find snap and snoop again 

 and maybe helen s doll  too   said flossie   we ll hunt for her some
more  

 but it s easier to hunt for snoop   said freddie    cause he can holler
back when you holler at him  

 how can a cat holler   asked his sister 

 well  he can go  miaou   can t he   freddie asked   an  ain t that
hollerin   

 i  i guess so   flossie answered   oh  freddie  i know what let s do  
she cried suddenly 

 what  make mud pies again  i m tired of  em   sides  momsie just put
clean things on us  

 no  not make mud pies  i m tired of that  too  let s go off by
ourselves and hunt snoop  you know every time we ve gone very far from
camp we ve had to go with nan and bert  and you know when you hunt cats
you ought to be quiet  an  two can be more quiet than three or four  

 that s right   agreed freddie  after thinking it over 

 then let s just us two go   went on flossie   we won t get lost  

 nope  course not   said freddie   i can go all over the island  and i
won t let you be lost  snoop knows us better than he does nan and bert
anyhow   cause we play with him more  

 and if we find him   went on flossie   and he s too tired to walk home
we ll carry him  i ll carry his head part an  you can carry his tail  

 no  i want to carry his head  

 i choosed his head first   said flossie   the tail is nicest anyhow  

 then why don t you carry that  

  cause it s so flopsy  it never stays still  and when it flops in my
face it tickles me  please you carry the tail end  freddie  

 all right  flossie  i will  but we had better go now  or maybe momsie
or nan or bert or dinah might come out and tell us not to go  come on  

so  hand in hand  now and then looking back to make sure no one saw them
to order them back  flossie and freddie started out to search for the
lost snoop  they wandered here and there about the island  at first not
very far from the camp  when they were near the tents they did not call
the cat s name very loudly for fear of being heard 

 we can call him loud enough when we get farther away   said freddie 

 yep   agreed his sister   anyhow he isn t near the tents or he d ve
come back before this  

so the two little twins wandered farther and farther away until they
were well to the middle of the island  and out of sight of the white
tents 

 snoop  snoop  snoop   they called  but though they heard many noises
made by the birds  the squirrels and insects of the woods  there was no
answering cry from their cat 

after a while they came to a place where a little brook flowed between
green  mossy banks  it was a hot day and the children were warm and
tired 

 oh  i m goin  in wading   cried freddie  sitting down and taking off
his shoes and stockings 

 you hadn t better   said flossie   mamma mightn t like it  

 i ll tell her how nice it was when i get home   said the little fellow 
 and then she ll say it was all right  come on  flossie  

 no  i ve got clean white stockin s on and i don t want to get  em all
dirty  

 huh  they ve got some dirt on  em now  

 well  they aren t wet and they d get wet if i went in wading  

 not if you took  em off  

 yes they would   cause i never can get my feet dry on the grass like
you do  you go in wading  freddie  and i ll sit here an  watch you  

so freddie stepped into the cool water and shouted with glee  then he
waded out a little farther and soon a queer look came over his face 
flossie saw her brother sink down until the brook came up to the lower
edge of his knickerbockers  wetting them  while freddie cried 

 oh  i m caught  i m caught  flossie  help me  i m caught  




chapter xviii

flossie is tangled


flossie bobbsey  who had been sitting on the cleanest and dryest log she
could find near the edge of the stream to watch freddie wade  jumped up
as she heard him cry  she had been wishing she was with him  white
stockings or none 

 oh  freddie  what s the matter   she cried   what s happened  

 i  i m caught   he answered   can t you see i m caught  

 but how   she questioned eagerly   you aren t caught in a trap like
snap was  are you  

 no  it isn t a trap  it s sticky mud   freddie said   my feet are stuck
in the mud  

 oh  oh   said flossie  and a queer look came over her face   you are
stuck in the mud  how did you do it  freddie  

 i didn t do it  it did it  i just stepped in a soft place  and now
when i pull one foot out the other sticks in deeper  can t you help me
out  flossie  

 yes  i ll help you out   she cried  and she ran down to the edge of the
stream  as though she intended to wade out to where poor freddie was
trying to pull his feet loose from the sticky mud 

 oh  don t come in  don t come in   cried freddie  waving her back with
his hand   you ll be stuck  too  

flossie stood still on the edge of the little brook  she looked at
freddie  who was in the middle of the stream  too far out for flossie to
reach with her outstretched hands  though she tried to do so 

 can t you pull your feet out   she asked 

 nope   answered freddie   i can t  for i ve tried  as soon as i get one
foot up a little way the other goes down in deeper  

 then i ll go and call mamma  

 no  don t do that   begged freddie   maybe if you would get a long
stick  flossie  and hold it out to me  i could sort of pull myself
out  

 oh  i know  it s like the picture in my story book of the boy who fell
through the ice  and his sister held out a long pole to him and he
pulled himself out  wait a minute  freddie  and i ll get the stick  i m
glad you didn t fall through the ice  though   cause you d get cold
maybe  

 this water is nice and warm   said freddie   but i don t like the mud
i m stuck in   cause it makes me feel so tickly between the toes  

 i ll help you out   said flossie   wait a minute  

she searched about on the bank until she found a long smooth branch of a
tree  holding to one end of this she held the other end out to her
brother  freddie had to turn half around to get hold of it as his back
was toward flossie  and she could not cross the brook 

 now hold tight   cried the little boy   i m going to pull  

flossie braced her feet in the sand on the bank of the brook and her
brother began to pull himself out of the mud  his feet had sunk down to
quite a depth  and when he first pulled he made flossie slide along the
ground until she cried 

 oh  freddie  you re going to make me stuck  too  don t pull me into the
water  

freddie stopped just in time  with the toes of flossie s shoes almost in
the water 

 did you pull loose a little bit   she asked 

 yes  a little  but i don t want to pull you in  flossie  if you could
only hold on to a tree or a rock  then i wouldn t drag you along  

 maybe i can hold to this tree   and flossie pointed to one near by   if
i can stretch my arms i can reach it  

 look for a longer tree branch to hold out to me   said freddie  and
when his sister had found this she could reach one end to her brother 
keep the other end in her right hand  and with her left arm hold on to a
small tree  the tree braced flossie against being pulled along the bank 
and when next freddie tried  he dragged his feet and legs safely from
the sticky mud  and could wade out on the hard  gravelly bottom of the
brook 

 i guess that was a mud hole where some fish used to live   said the
little fellow  as he came ashore  a little bit frightened by what had
happened 

 your feet are all muddy   said flossie   and you are all wet around
your knees  

 oh  that ll dry   said freddie   and i can wash the mud off my feet  it
was awful sticky  

it certainly seemed to be  for it took quite a while to wash it off his
bare feet and legs  though he stood for some time in the brook  where
there was a white  pebbly bottom  and used bunches of moss for a bath
sponge 

but at last freddie s legs were clean  though they were quite red from
having been rubbed so hard with the moss sponge  flossie  too  having
helped her brother scrub himself  had gotten some water on her shoes and
stockings  and a little mud  too 

 but we can walk through places where the grass is high   said freddie 
 and that will brush the mud off  and the sun will dry your stockin s
same as it will my pants  

 and we ll keep on calling for snoop   said flossie 

freddie having put on his stockings and shoes  the two children set out
again  wandering here and there  calling for the black cat  but either
he did not hear them or he would not answer  and when  after an hour or
two  they got back to camp  they had not found their pet 

 where have you two been   asked mrs  bobbsey   i was just getting
anxious about you  

 we ve been looking for snoop   said flossie 

 and i went in wadin  an  got stuck in the mud  and my pants got a
little wet  and flossie s shoes and stockin s got wet an  muddy  but we
waded in tall grass and we re not very muddy now   said freddie  all out
of breath  but anxious to get the worst over with at once 

 oh  you shouldn t have gone in wading   cried mrs  bobbsey 

 you didn t tell me not to  not to day you didn t tell me   freddie
defended himself 

 no  because i didn t think you d do such a thing   replied his mother 
 i can t tell you every day the different things you mustn t do  there
are too many of them  

 but there are so many things we can do too  oh  just lots of them  

 yes  and the things we may do and the things we re not to do are just
awful hard to tell apart sometimes  momsie   put in flossie 

 yes m  they are   added freddie   and how is a feller and his sister to
know every single time what they re to do and what they re not to do  

 suppose you try stopping before you do a thing to ask yourselves
whether you ought to do it or not  and not wait until after the thing is
done to ask yourselves that question   suggested mrs  bobbsey   that
might help some  

 well  i won t go wading any more to day   promised the little fellow 
 but i didn t think i d get stuck in the mud  

mrs  bobbsey wanted to laugh  but she did not dare let the two small
twins see her  for they would think it only fun  and really they ought
not to have gotten wet and muddy 

 and so you couldn t find snoop   remarked mr  bobbsey at supper that
night   well  it s too bad  i guess i ll have to get you another dog and
cat  

 no  don t  just yet  please   said nan   maybe we ll find our own  and
we never could love any new ones as we love snap and snoop  

 nope  we couldn t   declared flossie  while freddie nodded his head in
agreement with her 

 but you could get us some new go around bugs   the little girl went on 
 we haven t found ours yet  

 that s so   remarked mr  bobbsey   it s queer where they went to  well 
i ll see if i can get any more  though i may have to send to new york 
but you two little ones must not go off by yourselves again  looking for
snoop  

 could we go to look for snap   asked freddie  as if that was different 

 no  not for snap either  you must stay around camp unless some one goes
with you to the woods  

it was a few days after this  when mrs  bobbsey  with the four twins 
went out to pick blueberries  that they met a number of women and
children who also had baskets and pails  but none of them was filled
with the fruit which  now  was at its best 

 what is the matter with the berries   asked mrs  bobbsey   we have been
able to pick only a few  the bushes seem to have been cleaned of all the
ripe ones  

 that s what they have   said blueberry tom  who was with the other
pickers   and it s the gypsies who s gettin  the berries  too  

 are you sure   asked mrs  bobbsey   we haven t seen any gypsies on the
island  

 they don t stay here all the while   said tom   they have their camp
over on the main shore  and they row here and get the berries when
they re ripest  that s why there ain t any for us  the gypsies get  em
before we have a chance  they re pickin  blueberries as soon as it s
light enough to see  

 well  i suppose they have as much right to them as we have   said mrs 
bobbsey   but i would like to get enough for some pies  

 i can show you where there are more than there are around here  
offered tom   it s a little far to walk  though  

 well  we re not tired  for we just came out   said mrs  bobbsey   so if
you ll take us there  tom  we ll be very thankful  

 come on   said the boy  whose face was once more covered with blue
stains   i ll show you  

the other berry pickers  who did not believe tom knew of a better place 
said they would stay where they were  and  perhaps  by hard work they
might fill their pails or baskets  and so tom and the bobbseys went off
by themselves 

tom  indeed  seemed to know where  on the island  was one spot where
grew the largest and sweetest blueberries  and the gypsies  if the
members of the tribe did come to gather the fruit  seemed to have passed
by this place 

 oh  what lots of them   cried bert  as he saw the laden bushes 

 yes  there s more than i thought   said tom   i ll get my basket full
here all right  

soon all were picking  though flossie and freddie may have put into
their mouths as many as went in their two baskets  but their mother did
not expect them to gather much fruit 

they had picked enough for several pies  and mrs  bobbsey was looking
about for the two smaller twins who had wandered off a little way  when
she heard flossie scream 

 what is it   asked her mother quickly   is it a snake   and she started
to run toward her little girl 

 maybe she s stuck in the mud  as freddie was   exclaimed bert 

 mamma  mamma   cried flossie   come and get me  

 she  she s all tangled up in a net   cried the voice of freddie   oh 
come here  

mrs  bobbsey  nan  bert and tom ran toward the sound of the children s
voices 




chapter xix

the twins fall down


again flossie cried 

 i m all tangled  i m all tangled up  come and help me get out  

 what in the world can she mean   asked mrs  bobbsey 

 i m sure i don t know   answered bert 

 what did freddie say about a net   asked nan  as she stumbled and
spilled her blueberries  she was going to stop to pick them up 

 never mind them   her mother said   let them go  we must see what the
matter is with flossie  

they saw a few seconds later  as they turned on the path  on top of a
little hill  in a place where there was a grassy spot with bushes
growing all around it  they saw flossie and freddie 

freddie was dancing around very much excited  but flossie was standing
still  and they soon saw the reason for this  she was entangled in a net
that was spread out on the ground and partly raised up on the bushes  it
was like a fish net which the children had often seen the men or boys
use in lake metoka  but the meshes  or holes in it  were smaller  so
that only a very little fish could have slipped through  and the cord
from which the net was woven was not as heavy as that of the fish nets 

 flossie s caught  flossie s caught   cried freddie  still dancing
about 

 come and get me loose  come and get me loose   flossie begged 

 mother s coming  mother s coming   answered mrs  bobbsey   but how in
the world did it happen  

she did not wait for an answer  but  as soon as she came near  she
started to rush right into the net herself to lift out her little girl 
but bert  seeing what would happen  cried 

 look out  mother  you ll get tangled up  too  see  the net is caught on
flossie s shoes and around her legs and arms  she must have fallen
right into it  

 she did   said freddie   we were walking along  picking berries  and
all of a sudden flossie was tangled in the net  i tried to get her out 
but i got tangled  too  only i took my knife and cut some of the cords  

 and that s what we ve got to do   said mrs  bobbsey   the net is so
entangled around flossie that we ll never get her out otherwise  have
you a knife  bert  

 yes  mother  stand still  flossie   he called to his little sister 
 the more you move the worse you get tangled  

with his mother s help bert soon cut away enough of the meshes of the
queer net so that flossie could get loose  she was not hurt  not even
scratched  but she was frightened and she had been crying 

 there you are   cried mother bobbsey  hugging her little girl in her
arms   not a bit hurt  my little fat fairy  but how in the world did you
get in the net  and what is it doing up on top of this hill in the midst
of a blueberry patch  

 i  i just stumbled into it   said flossie   same as freddie got stuck
in the mud  only i didn t wade in the water  

 no  there isn t any water around here   returned nan   i can t see what
a net is doing here  i thought they only used them to catch fish  

 maybe they put it up here to dry  as the fishermen at the seashore dry
their nets   said mrs  bobbsey 

 no   announced tom  who had been looking at the net   this ain t for
fishes  

 what is it for then   asked bert 

 it s for snarin  birds  i ve seen  em before  men spread the nets out
on the grass  and over bushes near where the birds come to feed  and
when they try to fly they get caught and tangled in the meshes  i guess
this net ain t been here very long  for there ain t any birds caught in
it  

 but who put it here   asked mrs  bobbsey   i think it s a shame to
catch the poor birds that way  who did it  

tom looked carefully around before he answered  then he said 

 i think it was the gypsies  

 the gypsies   cried bert 

 yes  they re a shiftless lot  they don t work and they take what don t
belong to  em  they re too lazy to hunt with a gun  so they snare birds
in a net  why  they ll even eat sparrows  make a pie of  em my mother
says  and when they get robins and blackbirds they re so much bigger
they can broil  em over their fires  this is a bird net  that s what it
is  

 i believe you re right   said mrs  bobbsey  when she had looked more
closely at it   it isn t the kind they use in fishing  but do you really
think the gypsies put it here  tom  

 yes m  i really do  they put  em here other years  though i never seen
one before  you see the gypsies sometimes camp here and sometimes on the
mainland  all they have to do is to spread their net  and go away  when
they come back next day there s generally a lot of birds caught in it
and they take  em out and eat  em  

 well  they caught a queer kind of bird this time   said bert  with a
smile at his little sister   and it didn t do their net any good   he
added  as he looked at the cut meshes 

 i m sorry to have destroyed the property of any one else   said mrs 
bobbsey   but we had to get flossie loose  and i don t believe those
gypsies have any right to spread a net for birds  

 my mother says they haven t   replied tom   it s agin the law  

 let s take the net away   suggested bert 

 no  we haven t any right to do that   said his mother   but we can tell
the man who has to enforce the laws against hunting birds  i ll speak to
your father about it  are you all right now  flossie  

 yes  momsie  but it scared me when i was in the net  

 i should think so   exclaimed nan  petting her sister   did you just
stumble into it  

 yep  i was walkin  along  and i saw a bush with a lovely lot of
blueberries on it  i ran to it and then my foot tripped on a stone and i
fell into the net  first i didn t know what it was  and when i tried to
get up i was all tangled  then i hollered  

 and i helped her holler   said freddie 

 indeed  you did  dear  you were a good little boy to stay by flossie 
but you re both all right now  and next time you come berrying stay
closer by mother  

 you ve got lots of berries   said flossie  looking at bert s basket 

 yes  tom showed us this good place  and now i guess we d better go  
said bert   maybe those gypsies might come to look in their net  

he glanced around as he spoke  but though it was lonely on this part of
blueberry island there were no signs of the dark skinned men with rings
in their ears who had set the bird net 

dinah made enough blueberry pie to satisfy even the four twins  and when
mr  bobbsey heard about the net he told an officer  who took it away 
whether or not the gypsies found out what had happened to their snare 
as the net is sometimes called  the bobbseys did not hear  nor did they
see any of the wandering tribe  at least for a while 

jolly camping days followed  though now and then it rained  which did
not make it so nice  but  take it all in all  the bobbseys had a fine
time on blueberry island  mr  bobbsey got flossie and freddie some new
 go around  bugs  and the small twins had lots of fun with them  the old
ones they did not find 

snoop was not found either  though many blueberry pickers  as well as
the bobbseys themselves  looked for the missing black cat  nor was snap
located  though an advertisement was put in the papers and a reward
offered for him  but whisker did not go away  nor did any one try to
take him  and he gave the twins many a fine ride 

 and i m glad the gypsies didn t get whisker   observed flossie   i like
him  maybe not so much as i like snap and snoop  but awfully well i like
him  

 yes  he s a nice goat  nicer n mike s goat that we  most bought  but
didn t  i m glad now that we didn t get mike s goat  aren t you 
flossie  

 yes  i am  

the bobbseys had been camping on the island about a month  when one day
mrs  bobbsey went over to lakeport to do some shopping  taking nan and
bert with her  and leaving flossie and freddie in charge of their
father  of course dinah and sam stayed on the island also 

but you can easily imagine what happened  after mr  bobbsey had played a
number of games with the small twins he sat down in a shady place to
rest and read a book  thinking flossie and freddie would be all right
playing near the big tent 

the two little ones were making a sand city  they made a square wall of
sand  and inside this they built sand houses  railroads  a tunnel and
many other things  until freddie suddenly said 

 oh  if we only had some of the clam shells that are down by the lake we
could make a lot more things  

 so we could   cried flossie   let s go and get some  

so  never thinking to ask their father  who was still reading  away
rushed the two twins  after  clam  shells  they were not really shells
of clams  but of fresh water mussels  but they were almost like the
shells of the soft clams one sees at the beach  the mussels are brought
up on shore by muskrats who eat the inside meat and leave the empty
shells  the small twins often used the shells in their play and games 

the place where the mussel shells were usually to be found was not far
from the tents  but like most children in going to one place flossie and
freddie took the longest way  they were in no hurry  the sun was shining
brightly  and it was such fun to wander along over the island  so 
before they knew it  they were a long distance from  home   as they
called twin camp 

 maybe we oughtn t to ve come   said flossie  as she stopped to pick
some blueberries 

 we re not so far   said freddie   i know my way back  oh  flossie  look
at that butterfly   he suddenly called  making a grab for the fluttering
creature  the butterfly flew on a little way and freddie raced after it 
followed by flossie 

 now i m goin  to get it   the little boy cried  with his hat he made a
swoop for the butterfly  and then suddenly he and flossie  who was
close behind him  tumbled down through a hole in the ground  which
seemed quickly to open at their very feet  between two clumps of bushes 

 oh   cried freddie  as he felt himself falling down 

 oh  dear   echoed flossie 

then they found themselves in great darkness 




chapter xx

the queer noise


freddie bobbsey sat down with a thump  flossie bobbsey sat down with a
bump  this was after they had fallen down the queer hole  and yet it had
not been so much of a fall as it was a slide 

both of them being fat and plump  much fatter and plumper since they had
come to twin camp than before  the thump and the bump did not hurt them
very much 

they had slid down into the hole on a sort of hill of sand  and if you
have ever slid down a sandy hillside you know the stopping part doesn t
hurt very much  and  after all  the part of a fall that hurts  as the
irishman said  is not really the falling  it s the stopping so suddenly
that causes the pain 

 freddie  freddie   called flossie  a few seconds after she and her
little brother had fallen down the hole   freddie  are you there  

 yep  i m here  flossie   was freddie s answer   only i dunno  xactly
where it is  i can t see  

 nor me neither  but are you been hurted  freddie  

 no  are you  

the children were forgetting all about the right way to use words  which
their mother had so often told them  but as they were excited  and a
little frightened  perhaps we must excuse them this time 

 i  i just sort of  of bumped myself  flossie   said freddie   are you
all right  and where are you  

 i m right here   replied the little girl   but i can t see you 
i  i    it s awful dark  freddie  

 i can see a little light now   freddie went on   let s get up and see
if we can crawl back  my legs are all right  

 so s mine  freddie  i guess i can      and then flossie suddenly
stopped and gave a scream 

 what s the matter   asked freddie  and the little boy s voice was not
quite steady 

 i  i touched something   gasped his sister   it was something soft and
fuzzy  

 oh  was that you   asked freddie  and his voice did not sound so
frightened now   well  that was my head you touched  i  i thought maybe
it was something  something after me  i didn t know you were so close to
me  flossie  

 i didn t either  but i m glad i touched you  where s your hand  i m
sort of stuck in this sand and i can t get up  

by this time the eyes of both the children had become more used to the
darkness of the place into which they had fallen  and they could dimly
see one another  freddie scrambled to his feet  shaking from his waist
and trousers the sand that had partly filled them when he had slid down
the incline  and gave his hand to flossie  she had about as much sand
inside her clothes as he had  and she shook this out  both children then
turned and looked up at the slide down which they had so suddenly
fallen 

up at the top  and very far up it seemed to them  they could see  at the
end of the sandy slide where they had started to slip  a hole through
which they had fallen  it was between two big stones  and had a large
bush on either side  it had been covered with grass and bushes so that
the small twins had not seen it until they stepped right into it  then
the grass and bushes had given way  letting the children down 

 we  we ve got to get back up there  somehow   said freddie with a
doleful sigh  as he looked at the place down which he and his sister had
tumbled 

 yes  i would like to get up out of here   said flossie   but how can
we  freddie  

 climb up  same as we falled down  come on  

taking his sister by the hand  freddie started to climb up the hill of
sand  but he and flossie soon found that though it was easy enough to
slide down  it was not so easy to climb back  the sand slipped from
under their feet  and even though they tried to go up on their hands and
knees it was not to be done 

 oh  dear   cried flossie after a while   i wish we were jack and
jill  

 why   asked freddie 

  cause they went up a hill  an  we can t  

 maybe we can if we try again   said freddie   anyhow  i don t want to
be jack  and fall down and break my crown  

 you haven t any crown   said flossie   only kings an   an  fairies have
crowns  

 well  it says in the book that jack has a crown  an  if i was jack i d
have one too  only i m not and i m glad  

 well  i wish i was jill  so i could have some of that pail of water  
sighed flossie   i m firsty   and she laughed as she used the word she
used to say when she was a baby 

 so m i   said freddie   let s try to get up to the top  an  then we can
get a drink  maybe  only i d rather be ali baba than jack  then i could
say   open sesame   and the door to the cave would open of itself  and
we could walk out and carry diamonds and gold with us  

 i d rather have bread and butter than gold  i m hungry  and i d most
rather have a drink   sighed the little girl   come on  freddie  let s
try to get up that hill  but it s awful hard work  

 yes  it s hard   agreed freddie   but we ve done lots harder things
than that   you see  freddie was trying to keep up his little sister s
courage 

once more the two little twins tried to climb the hill of shifting sand 
but they could get up only a little way before slipping back  they did
not get hurt  the sand was too soft and slippery for that  but they were
tired and hot  and  oh  so thirsty 

 i m not goin  to climb any more   finally said flossie   i m tired  i m
goin  to stay here until mamma or papa or nan or bert comes for us  

 maybe they won t come   freddie said 

 yes  they will   declared flossie  shaking her head   they allers comes
when we re lost and we re losted now  

 yes  i guess so   agreed freddie   i wonder where we are anyhow 
flossie  

 why  in a big hole   she said   oh  freddie   she suddenly cried 
 maybe we can get out the other way if we can t climb up  

 which other way   asked her brother 

 out there   and in the light that came down the hole through which the
twins had fallen freddie could see his sister pointing to what seemed
another dim light  far away at the end of the big hole  for flossie and
freddie had fallen into a big hole  there was no doubt of that  though
it was pretty dark all about them  there was enough light for them to
see that they were in a cavern 

 maybe it s a cave  like the one we went into from the lake when we
found the boat   said flossie  after thinking it over a bit   and if we
can t get out one end we can the other  

 maybe   cried freddie eagerly   anyway  we can t get up that hill of
sand   and he pointed to the one down which they had slid   come on 
we ll walk toward the other light  

far away  through what seemed a long lane of blackness  there was a dim
light  like some big star  and toward this  hoping it would lead to a
hole through which they could get out  the children walked 

as they neared it the light grew brighter  and they were beginning to
feel that their troubles were over when suddenly they both came to a
stop 

for  at the same time  they had heard a queer noise  it came from the
darkness just ahead of them and was such a funny sound that flossie put
both her arms around freddie  not so much to take care of him as that
she wanted him to take care of her 

 did  did you hear that   she whispered 

freddie nodded his head  and then  remembering that flossie could not
very well see his motions in the darkness he said 

 yes  i heard it  i wonder     

 hark   whispered flossie   there it goes again  




chapter xxi

 here comes snap  


the sound came once more through the darkness to the little bobbsey
twins  and as they listened to it flossie and freddie looked at one
another in surprise  they could just dimly make out the faces of each
other in the dimness 

 mamma  mamma   cried a voice  for it was a voice that had caused the
queer sound  yet it did not sound like the voice of man  woman or child 
 mamma  mamma   it cried 

 hear it   asked flossie again 

 yep   answered freddie   it s a little boy or girl  like us  an  it s
in this cave  i guess lots of childrens get lost here like us  now i m
not afraid  

 mamma  papa  mamma   came the voice again 

 it  it s kind of funny   whispered flossie to freddie   don t you
think it s kind of funny  freddie  

 yes  but i know what makes it  

 what  

 it s being in this cave  you know how we used to holler at the hill 
when we went to the country   member that  

 yep   answered flossie 

 an  how our voices used to come back an  sort of hit us in the face  
went on her brother 

 yep  

 well  that was an echo   said freddie   an  that s what makes it sound
so queer here  it s an echo  

 oh   said flossie  she had not thought of that 

once more the voice sounded out of the darkness 

 mamma  papa  mamma  

 there  hear it  it s an echo   cried freddie 

flossie listened a moment  then she said 

 if it was an echo  freddie  why didn t your voice echo too  

 oh   er  well   cause i didn t want it to   freddie made answer   i can
do it now  hello  hello  hello   he called as loudly as he could 

and then  to the surprise of the children  back came a voice in answer 
and in more than an answer  for it asked a question  no longer did the
voice call   mamma  papa  

instead it cried 

 hello  there  what s the matter  who are you and what do you want 
where are you  

flossie and freddie were so startled that  for a moment  they could only
hold on to each other in the darkness 

then freddie found his voice enough to speak  he said 

 did you hear that echo  flossie  

 that wasn t an echo   declared his little sister quickly   echoes only
say the same things you say and this  this was different  

 yes  it was   freddie agreed   but maybe it s a different kind of
echo  

 try it again   suggested flossie  when they had remained quietly in the
darkness for a time  and during that time they had not heard the
strange voice calling  it seemed to have been hushed after the  echo  
if that is what it was  made answer   call again   flossie begged her
brother  once more he called 

 hello  hello  hello  

 well  what do you want   back came a voice in question  this time there
was no doubt about its not being an echo  it had not repeated a single
word that freddie had cried 

 oh  how funny   cried flossie   what makes it do that  

before freddie could answer  even if he had known what to say  the two
children saw a light coming toward them  it was the light of a lantern 
bobbing about in the darkness  and because it was a light  which chased
away some of the gloom  they were glad  even though they had been a bit
frightened by the queer voice and the echo which did not repeat words as
the other echo had done 

 oh  maybe it s daddy and bert come to look for us   cried flossie
eagerly 

freddie thought the same thing  for he called out 

 here we are  daddy  

but  to the surprise and disappointment of the children  a surly voice
answered them 

 i m not your father  who are you  anyhow  and what are you doing in
this cave  

flossie and freddie  clinging to each other  shrank back in fear  then 
as the light came nearer  they saw that the lantern was carried by a
tall man  a man with a very dark face  he had gold rings in his ears  on
his feet were big boots  and around his neck was a bright yellow
handkerchief 

 oh   gasped flossie   oh  he  he s a gypsy  

freddie saw it  too  the man seemed surprised to see the children  he
gave a sort of grunt  held the lantern up to their faces  and exclaimed 

 why  there s two of  em  

 yes  we  we re twins   stammered flossie 

 twins are always two   freddie added  thinking  perhaps  that the gypsy
man did not know that 

 twins  eh   remarked the man in a questioning voice 

 the bobbsey twins   said freddie   we came from our camp  and we     

 how d you get in this cave  that s what i want to know   cried the man 
and he spoke harshly   tell me  how did you get here   he asked  and he
held the lantern in front of the faces of the two little children 

 we  we fell in here   said freddie  pushing flossie behind him  he felt
that he must look after his little sister and protect her 

 fell in   cried the man 

 yes  through a hole  we slid down a sandy hill  and we couldn t climb
back again  we saw a little light over this way and we walked to it and
then we heard some one cry   mamma   are there any more little children
here   freddie asked 

 hum  yes  some   half grunted the gypsy   but not your kind  i don t
see how you came here   he went on  speaking to himself  it seemed  for
he did not glance at flossie or freddie and there was no one else near
by  the man looked all about the cave 

 which way did you come   he asked 

 back there   and freddie  who was doing most of the talking  pointed
toward the place where he and flossie had tried so hard to climb up 

 come and show me   the man ordered them  and when they walked back with
him  the lantern making queer shadows on the side walls of the cave 
flossie and freddie pointed to the place down which they had slid 

 hum   murmured the gypsy   i never knew there was a way into the cave
from there  i must see about that  it wasn t open before  well  now
you re here i ve got to make up my mind what i ll do with you   he went
on  as he motioned for flossie and her brother to walk back in front of
him  he held the lantern so they could see where to step  but the
earthen floor of the cave was smooth  and the children did not stumble 

 will you take us back to twin camp  where we live   asked freddie 
 we re the bobbseys you know  and we didn t mean to run away again 
though i guess we re lost  my mamma and my papa will be looking for us 
and if you ll take us to the camp     

 well  maybe i will after a bit  but not now   said the gypsy  shaking
his head so that his earrings jiggled   you ll have to stay here with us
awhile  if you went out now  and told your folks you had found us here
we d all be sent to jail  most likely  i ll see what the others say  

flossie and freddie wondered what others he meant  but he did not tell
them  he kept walking close behind them  and there was nothing for them
to do but to keep on 

suddenly they turned a sort of corner of the cave  and then the children
saw something that surprised them  seated around a table  on which some
candles  stuck in bottles  were burning  were a number of men  they were
all gypsies  like the man who had met the children farther back in the
cave  and as he walked forward  behind flossie and freddie  the other
gypsies looked up 

 who was calling   asked one of the dark men at the table 

 these two   said the first man  pointing to the little bobbsey twins 
 they answered my call and i found them  they fell down a hole at the
far end of the cave  near the sand  i never knew it was there  

 it is an old entrance   put in a gypsy who was eating some bread and
tomato  cutting first a slice of one and then of the other with a big
knife   that entrance was overgrown with grass long ago   he added 

 well  these two stumbled on it   grumbled the man who had found flossie
and freddie   we d better stop it up  and now what s to be done with
 em  

 we ll have to keep  em here for a while   said two or three at once 
and hearing this the hearts of flossie and freddie were sad 

 yes   went on the first gypsy   we ll have to keep  em here until we re
ready to go  and that won t be for two or three days yet  the only
trouble is that some of their folks may find where we have hidden  em
and     

 hi   suddenly cried an old gypsy  and then he said something very
quickly  but in words the children could not understand  it was gypsy
talk  after that all the men spoke in this queer way  but flossie and
freddie felt sure they were being talked about  for the men looked at
them many times in the light of the lantern and candles 

suddenly  when there came a lull in the talk  and the twins were
wondering what was coming next  they heard a dog barking  now 
ordinarily  this would not have surprised them  for they knew the
gypsies kept many dogs  and some might be in the cave  but there was
something different about this bark 

in wonder flossie and freddie looked at each other  then freddie cried
out 

 that sounds like snap  

all at once there came a regular chorus of barks  and with them a man s
voice could be heard shouting  then came a dog s growl and yells from a
man s voice  then more barks 

 look out   shouted some one in the cave   the dog s loose  

flossie and freddie saw a big dog spring into view from somewhere out of
the darkness of the cave  and as the eyes of the twins lighted on him 
freddie cried 

 illustration   oh  flossie  here comes snap  

 the bobbsey twins on blueberry island    page 230  

 here comes snap  here comes snap  oh  flossie  our dog that was lost is
found  here s snap  




chapter xxii

happy days


there was no doubt about it  there was snap  alive and happy  if one
could tell that last by the way he barked and tried to kiss both flossie
and freddie at the same time with his red tongue  it was snap  but he
was thinner than when at home in lakeport  and his nice coat of hair was
muddy in some places  and not at all neat 

 oh  but it s snap  it s our snap   cried freddie in delight 

 and he found us   added flossie   now the gypsies can t make us stay
here   and standing beside the big dog she looked boldly at the dark men
who were now standing about the table 

a man came running out of the darkness of what seemed to be a small cave
inside the larger one  and cried 

 he broke away  i couldn t keep him any longer  he seemed to hear some
one calling him  

 keep still   sharply ordered the gypsy who had had the lantern 

 oh   exclaimed the other man  as he saw flossie and freddie   is it
their dog  

there was no need to answer him  any one could see that snap belonged to
the bobbsey twins  he was so happy with them 

 did you  did you have our dog all the while   asked freddie  as he
played with snap s long ears 

the gypsy who had had the lantern said something in his strange language
and no one answered  probably he had told them not to speak 

 oh  i m so glad to see you   cried flossie   we looked everywhere for
you  snap  didn t we  freddie  

 yes  we did  and now we ve got him we can go home  snap knows the way
home  he can take us there  

 oh  no  he can t   said flossie 

 why   asked her brother 

  cause he s never been in our tent camp  he doesn t know where it is 
but maybe you know  freddie  

 yes  i know the way  if  if we can get out of this cave   and he looked
at the gypsies  they were talking among themselves  one of them walked
toward snap and held out his hand toward a broken rope around the dog s
neck  but the animal growled in such a fierce way that the gypsy drew
back in fear 

then there was more talk among the dark faced men about the children and
the dog  the men seemed to be worried  snap barked and ran a little way
ahead  as though to lead the way out of the cave  again a man tried to
catch him  but the dog s savage growl made him draw back 

 i guess snap wants us to come with him   said flossie   let s go 
freddie  

 all right  come on   and freddie  taking flossie s hand  started out of
the cave  they were afraid  the children were  that the gypsies might
stop them  but the man who had had the lantern said 

 come on  i ll show you two the way out and you can go to your camp  no
use keeping you  now that your dog is loose  he d make trouble for us 
hurry up  you fellows  get things out of the way   he called to the
other gypsies  and they began taking things off the table as though they
were going to leave 

but flossie and freddie did not care about that  all they knew was that
they had found snap  and that they were going home with him to twin
camp  and snap was as glad as were they 

 there you are   said the gypsy in rather a growling voice  as he led
the children to where a big patch of sunlight shone into the cave   i
guess you can find your way home from here  

flossie and freddie ran on  snap going ahead  and  to the surprise of
the twins they found themselves at the mouth of the cave  the same place
where they had taken shelter from the rain the day they were in the
drifting boat 

 why  look here   cried freddie   isn t this funny  flossie  we ve come
out of the same cave we were in before  how did we get in  

 i don t know   answered the little girl    cept maybe it s a fairy
cave an  changes  

but it was not that kind at all  the children had only fallen down a
hole at one end of the cave  and when the gypsy man led them through
they came out at the other end  where they had first gone in  snap
barked and ran down to the edge of the lake to get a drink of water 

 he s glad to come out   said flossie 

 awful glad   agreed freddie   so m i  

 me  too   added the little girl   i wonder how he got in there  

 i guess the gypsies took him   said freddie   they liked him  cause he
is such a good dog  i m so glad we ve got him back  now if we could get
snoop back we d be all right  wouldn t we  snap   and he put his arms
around the dog s shaggy neck  while flossie patted his back 

happy because they had found their dog  and not worrying at all about
having been so nearly kept prisoners by the gypsies in the cave  the two
little bobbsey twins hurried away from the cavern  they were anxious to
get back to camp to tell the others how they had found snap  and the
dog seemed just as anxious to get away from the cave as were the little
boy and girl 

every once in a while freddie would turn and look back  and when his
sister asked him why he did this he told her he was looking to see if he
could see the black cat 

 she ought to be easier to find than snap   he said    cause she was
with us here on blueberry island  and snap must have been taken by the
gypsies in lakeport   afterward they found that this was so 

as the children  with their dog  walked along through the woods  keeping
close to the lake shore  as they knew that path led to their camp 
flossie and freddie heard a shout among the trees 

 there s nan   freddie said 

 yes  and bert   added his sister   i guess they re looking for us  

they were sure of this a little later  for they heard the cry 

 flossie  freddie  where are you  

 here we are   they answered  and then sounded a noise of some one
coming toward them  the next moment nan and bert came into view  both
stopped in surprise at the sight of the dog 

 where d you get him   asked nan 

 is he really snap   cried bert 

 yep  he really is   answered freddie   we found him  

 in a cave   added flossie 

 in a cave  

 and there were gypsies there   went on the little girl 

 an  they wanted to keep us   said freddie 

 but they didn t   added flossie 

 no  but snap was there  

 and he growled at the gypsy man  

 and he came away with us  

 snap was awful glad to see us  nan  

 and here we are now   said freddie  putting an end to this duet 

 oh  dear   exclaimed nan   this is dreadful  gypsies on this island 
and they almost kidnapped you  you must tell daddy right away  we ve
been looking everywhere for you  we thought you were lost again  and
you re all dirty and sandy   she cried 

 that s where we fell down a hole into the cave   said freddie  and he
told nan and bert what had happened  mr  bobbsey was much surprised when
the twins came home with the long missing snap  so was mrs  bobbsey  as
well as sam and dinah 

 gypsies here  are there   exclaimed mr  bobbsey   well  i ll have to
see about that  we don t want them hiding in a cave and stealing our
things  i guess i ll get some police officers and pay the tribe a
visit  

but when mr  bobbsey got to the cave with the officers the gypsies were
not there  they must have known that when the children went out they
would tell what had happened and that the police would come  so there
was nothing for the police to do  the gypsies had run away  they went to
the mainland in boats  some of the blueberry pickers said who had seen
them 

 and now that the island is free from the gypsies we ll have lots more
fun   said mrs  bobbsey   the thought of them made me nervous  

 hark   suddenly exclaimed nan  she  as well as all the other members
of the bobbsey family  had followed the police to the cave  even flossie
and freddie going along  riding to the place in the goat wagon drawn by
whisker 

 hark to what   asked bert 

 i thought i heard a noise   said the little girl   yes  there it goes
again  a sort of squeaky noise  

 it s a  it s a cat   cried flossie   oh  if it should be     

before she could finish one of the policemen flashed his lantern around
the sides of the cave  and then  from a dark corner  some animal came
slowly out 

 it is a cat   cried flossie 

 and it s our snoop   added freddie   oh  we ve got him back again  

 oh  goody   cried nan 

 well  well   said mr  bobbsey   everything is turning out right for you
children now  

 and snoop really was in this cave   exclaimed bert 

and so it proved  whether he had wandered off and had become lost in
some little hole of the cave  where he could not get out  or whether
the gypsies had stolen him  as they had snap  the bobbseys never heard 
but they knew they had their black cat again  and they were happy 
especially the little twins 

 i want to hug him   cried flossie  as the cat rubbed up against her
legs 

 so do i   cried freddie   and i want to hug the head part  you can hug
the tail end  

 that end doesn t purr   exclaimed flossie   i want the end that purrs  

 you must take turns   said mrs  bobbsey  laughing   you ought to be
glad you have snoop back instead of quarreling about him  well  we have
found nearly everything we wanted now  except that bacon some one took
the first night  

 i guess the gypsies got that   said mr  bobbsey   it must have been one
of them who was sneaking around in the night  and who awakened the
children  they probably wanted to have something to eat in their cave 
but they ve gone now  

 yes  and they seem to have left something behind them   observed one of
the policemen   i see something white over on one of the boxes they
used for a table  maybe it s only some old papers  though  

bert hurried over and picked up the white thing 

 it s a doll   he cried   flossie  did you leave your doll here  

 nope   answered the little twin 

 a doll   cried nan   oh  maybe it s helen s talking doll  let me see 
bert  

but bert had already pressed a spring and the doll began to call in a
queer phonographic voice 

 mamma  papa  

flossie and freddie looked at one another 

 that s the noise we heard when we fell into the cave   they said 

 then the gypsies did take helen s doll after all  and brought it with
them to this island   said mr  bobbsey   my  but they are great rascals 
they took our dog  our cat  our bacon  and helen s doll  

 but we ve got everything back except the bacon   said bert   the doll
seems to be all right  too  except she hasn t a dress  

 oh  helen found that the day she was here on the island   said
flossie   she found it in an old stump  you know  and i guess maybe the
gypsies hid it there  or dropped it  

 i guess so   agreed her mother   well  now  isn t this just wonderful 
we ve found helen s doll  and your dog and cat  it s a good thing we
came to blueberry island  

 but i m sorry the gypsies came here   said nan   they made a lot of
trouble  

 they ve gone now  though   remarked bert   it s queer that they brought
our dog and helen s doll here with them  

 maybe the little gypsy girl  whose papa took away helen s doll  brought
it here to play with   said nan 

and perhaps that is how it had happened  but the gypsies had gone away 
and no one knew just how they came to leave the doll in the cave  they
may have been afraid to take it away for fear a policeman would see them
have it  and then  too  it might suddenly speak when they had it  as it
spoke in the cave when flossie and freddie heard it 

 well  everything s come out all right   said mr  bobbsey   and now for
some happy days on blueberry island  with nothing to worry about   and 
indeed  the bobbsey twins did have very happy times 

snoop and snap were back with them again  and with whisker  the goat 
played with the children  helen was told about her lost doll having been
found  and she came to the island to get it  the go around bugs were not
found  maybe the gypsies took them  but mr  bobbsey bought new ones for
the little twins 

the police said the gypsy man who had picked the doll up from the yard
where helen had left it for a moment  must have taken it for his little
girl  and have hidden it in one of the wagons  then  some one of the
band  going about lakeport before the bobbseys went to the island  saw
snap about the house and enticed him away  they probably took him over
from the mainland in a rowboat  snap was a friendly dog  as for snoop he
either wandered away or was stolen  but now no more fear need be felt
about the gypsies  for they were far away  and when it rained the
bobbsey twins used to play in the gypsy cave  as they called it 

 oh  but i just love it on blueberry island   said flossie  as they all
came back to camp from a little picnic in the woods one day 

 so do i   said freddie   now let s hitch up whisker and have a ride  
and they did 

and so i must bring this story about the adventures of the bobbsey twins
to an end  they had many other good times  some on blueberry island  and
others when they went back to their lakeport home  and i may tell you
about them later  snap and snoop had a large part in the good times  and
the dog and cat were none the worse for having been kept in the gypsy
cave  nor was helen s doll  which the little girl was very glad to get
back  it talked as well as ever 

and now i will say good bye for you to the bobbsey twins 


the end


                                        


the bobbsey twins books

for little men and women

by laura lee hope

author of  the bunny brown series   etc 

durably bound  illustrated  uniform style of binding 

every volume complete in itself 

these books for boys and girls between the ages of three and ten stands
among children and their parents of this generation where the books of
louisa may alcott stood in former days  the haps and mishaps of this
inimitable pair of twins  their many adventures and experiences are a
source of keen delight to imaginative children everywhere 

          the bobbsey twins
          the bobbsey twins in the country
          the bobbsey twins at the seashore
          the bobbsey twins at school
          the bobbsey twins at snow lodge
          the bobbsey twins on a houseboat
          the bobbsey twins at meadow brook
          the bobbsey twins at home
          the bobbsey twins in a great city
          the bobbsey twins on blueberry island
          the bobbsey twins on the deep blue sea
          the bobbsey twins in the great west
          the bobbsey twins at cedar camp
          the bobbsey twins at the county fair
          the bobbsey twins camping out
          the bobbsey twins and baby may


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




the bunny brown series

by laura lee hope

author of the popular  bobbsey twins  books  etc 

durably bound  illustrated  uniform style of binding 

every volume complete in itself 

these stories by the author of the  bobbsey twins  books are eagerly
welcomed by the little folks from about five to ten years of age  their
eyes fairly dance with delight at the lively doings of inquisitive
little bunny brown and his cunning  trustful sister sue 

          bunny brown and his sister sue
          bunny brown and his sister sue on grandpa s farm
          bunny brown and his sister sue playing circus
          bunny brown and his sister sue at camp rest a while
          bunny brown and his sister sue at aunt lu s city home
          bunny brown and his sister sue in the big woods
          bunny brown and his sister sue on an auto tour
          bunny brown and his sister sue and their shetland pony
          bunny brown and his sister sue giving a show
          bunny brown and his sister sue at christmas tree cove
          bunny brown and his sister sue in the sunny south
          bunny brown and his sister sue keeping store
          bunny brown and his sister sue and their trick dog
          bunny brown and his sister sue at a sugar camp


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




six little bunkers series

by laura lee hope

author of the bobbsey twins books  the bunny brown series  the
make believe series  etc 

durably bound  illustrated  uniform style of binding 

every volume complete in itself 

delightful stories for little boys and girls which sprung into immediate
popularity  to know the six little bunkers is to take them at once to
your heart  they are so intensely human  so full of fun and cute
sayings  each story has a little plot of its own  one that can be easily
followed  and all are written in miss hope s most entertaining manner 
clean  wholesome volumes which ought to be on the bookshelf of every
child in the land 

          six little bunkers at grandma bell s
          six little bunkers at aunt jo s
          six little bunkers at cousin tom s
          six little bunkers at grandpa ford s
          six little bunkers at uncle fred s
          six little bunkers at captain ben s
          six little bunkers at cowboy jack s
          six little bunkers at mammy june s
          six little bunkers at farmer joel s
          six little bunkers at miller ned s



grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




the outdoor girls series

by laura lee hope

author of the  bobbsey twins    bunny brown  series  etc 

uniform style of binding  individual colored wrappers 

every volume complete in itself 

these tales take in the various adventures participated in by several
bright  up to date girls who love outdoor life 

          the outdoor girls of deepdale 
          or  camping and tramping for fun and health 

          the outdoor girls at rainbow lake 
          or  the stirring cruise of the motor boat gem 

          the outdoor girls in a motor car 
          or  the haunted mansion of shadow valley 

          the outdoor girls in a winter camp 
          or  glorious days on skates and ice boats 

          the outdoor girls in florida 
          or  wintering in the sunny south 

          the outdoor girls at ocean view 
          or  the box that was found in the sand 

          the outdoor girls on pine island 
          or  a cave and what it contained 

          the outdoor girls in army service 
          or  doing their bit for uncle sam 

          the outdoor girls at the hostess house 
          or  doing their best for the soldiers 

          the outdoor girls at bluff point 
          or  a wreck and a rescue 

          the outdoor girls at wild rose lodge 
          or  the hermit of moonlight falls 

          the outdoor girls in the saddle 
          or  the girl miner of gold run 

          the outdoor girls around the campfire 
          or  the old maid of the mountains 

          the outdoor girls on cape cod 
          or  sally ann of lighthouse rock 


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




the blythe girls books

by laura lee hope

individual colored wrappers and text illustrations by

thelma gooch

every volume complete in itself

the blythe girls  three in number  were left alone in new york city 
helen  who went in for art and music  kept the little flat uptown  while
margy just out of a business school  obtained a position as a private
secretary and rose  plain spoken and businesslike  took what she called
a  job  in a department store 


          the blythe girls  helen  margy and rose 
          or  facing the great world 

a fascinating tale of real happenings in the great metropolis 


          the blythe girls  margy s queer inheritance 
          or  the worth of a name 

the girls had a peculiar old aunt and when she died she left an unusual
inheritance  this tale continues the struggles of all the girls for
existence 


          the blythe girls  rose s great problem 
          or  face to face with a crisis 

rose still at work in the big department store  is one day faced with
the greatest problem of her life  a tale of mystery as well as exciting
girlish happenings 


          the blythe girls  helen s strange boarder 
          or  the girl from bronx park 

helen  out sketching  goes to the assistance of a strange girl  whose
real identity is a puzzle to all the blythe girls  who the girl really
was comes as a tremendous surprise 


          the blythe girls  three on a vacation 
          or  the mystery at peach farm 

the girls close their flat and go to the country for two weeks  and fall
in with all sorts of curious and exciting happenings  how they came to
the assistance of joe morris  and solved a queer mystery  is well
related 


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




amy bell marlowe s books for girls

charming  fresh and original stories

illustrated  wrappers printed in colors with individual design for each
story

miss marlowe s books for girls are somewhat of the type of miss alcott
and also mrs  meade  but all are thoroughly up to date and wholly
american in scene and action  good  clean absorbing tales that all girls
thoroughly enjoy 

          the oldest of four 
            or  natalie s way out 

a sweet story of the struggles of a live girl to keep a family from
want 


          the girls at hillcrest farm 
            or  the secret of the rocks 

relating the trials of two girls who take boarders on an old farm 


          a little miss nobody
            or  with the girls of pinewood hall 

tells of a school girl who was literally a nobody until she solved the
mystery of her identity 


          the girl from sunset ranch 
            or  alone in a great city 

a ranch girl comes to new york to meet relatives she has never seen  her
adventures make unusually good reading 


          wyn s camping days 
            or  the outing of the go ahead club 

a tale of happy days on the water and under canvas  with a touch of
mystery and considerable excitement 


          frances of the ranges 
            or  the old ranchman s treasure 

a vivid picture of life on the great cattle ranges of the west 


          the girls of rivercliff school 
            or  beth baldwin s resolve 

this is one of the most entertaining stories centering about a girl s
school that has ever been written 


          when oriole came to harbor light 

the story of a young girl  cast up by the sea  and rescued by an old
lighthouse keeper 


          when oriole traveled westward 

oriole visits the family of a rich ranchman and enjoys herself
immensely 


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




the make believe stories

 trademark registered  

by laura lee hope

author of the bobbsey twins books  etc 

colored wrappers and illustrations by harry l  smith

in this fascinating line of books miss hope has the various toys come to
life  when nobody is looking  and she puts them through a series of
adventures as interesting as can possibly be imagined 


the story of a sawdust doll

how the toys held a party at the toy counter  how the sawdust doll was
taken to the home of a nice little girl  and what happened to her there 


the story of a white rocking horse

he was a bold charger and a man purchased him for his son s birthday 
once the horse had to go to the toy hospital  and my  what sights he saw
there 


the story of a lamb on wheels

she was a dainty creature and a sailor bought her and took her to a
little girl relative and she had a great time 


the story of a bold tin soldier 

he was captain of the company and marched up and down in the store at
night  then he went to live with a little boy and had the time of his
life 


the story of a candy rabbit

he was continually in danger of losing his life by being eaten up  but
he had plenty of fun  and often saw his many friends from the toy
counter 


the story of a monkey on a stick

he was mighty lively and could do many tricks  the boy who owned him
gave a show  and many of the monkey s friends were among the actors 


the story of a calico clown

he was a truly comical chap and all the other toys loved him greatly 


the story of a nodding donkey

he made happy the life of a little lame boy and did lots of other good
deeds 


the story of a china cat

the china cat had many adventures  but enjoyed herself most of the time 


the story of a plush bear

this fellow came from the north pole  stopped for a while at the toy
store  and was than taken to the seashore by his little master 


the story of a stuffed elephant

he was a wise looking animal and had a great variety of adventures 


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




the flyaways stories

by alice dale hardy

author of the riddle club books

individual colored jackets and colored illustrations by

walter s  rogers

a splendid new line of interesting tales for the little ones 
introducing many of the well known characters of fairyland in a series
of novel adventures  the flyaways are a happy family and every little
girl and boy will want to know all about them 


the flyaways and cinderella

how the flyaways went to visit cinderella only to find that cinderella s
prince had been carried off by the three robbers  rumbo  hibo and jobo 
 i ll rescue him   cried pa flyaway and then set out for the stronghold
of the robbers  a splendid continuation of the original story of
cinderella 


the flyaways and little red riding hood

on their way to visit little red riding hood the flyaways fell in with
tommy tucker and the old woman who lived in a shoe  they told tommy
about the magic button on red riding hood s cloak  how the wicked wolf
stole the magic button and how the wolves plotted to eat up little red
riding hood and all her family  and how the flyaways and king cole sent
the wolves flying  makes a story no children will want to miss 


the flyaways and goldilocks

the flyaways wanted to see not only goldilocks but also the three bears
and they took a remarkable journey through the air to do so  tommy even
rode on a rocket and met the monstrous blue frog  when they arrived at
goldilocks  house they found that the three bears had been there before
them and mussed everything up  much to goldilocks  despair   we must
drive those bears out of the country   said pa flyaway  then they
journeyed underground to the yellow palace  and oh  so many things
happened after that 


grosset   dunlap  publishers  new york




                                        




transcriber s notes 

   obvious punctuation errors corrected 

   page 22  word  a  unclear and presumed   forgot a yeast 

   page 76   anothe  changed to  another    came after another 

   page 128   blueberrry  changed to  blueberry    blueberry stained 

   page 136   blueberrry  changed to  blueberry    more
             blueberry pickers 

   page 189   dirt  changed to  dirty    all dirty 

   page 236   th  changed to  then    and then sounded 

   advertisement for the flyaways and goldilocks   goldilock s 
   changed to  goldilocks   twice   goldilocks  house   goldilocks 
   despair 



   end of the project gutenberg ebook the bobbsey twins on blueberry
island   


        this file should be named 20311 txt or 20311 zip        


this and all associated files of various formats will be found in 
http   www gutenberg org dirs 2 0 3 1 20311



updated editions will replace the previous one  the old editions
will be renamed 

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works  so the foundation
 and you   can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties   special rules 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license  apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg tm concept and trademark   project
gutenberg is a registered trademark  and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks  unless you receive specific permission   if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook  complying with the
rules is very easy   you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works  reports  performances and
research   they may be modified and printed and given away  you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks   redistribution is
subject to the trademark license  especially commercial
redistribution 



    start  full license    

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works  by using or distributing this work
 or any other work associated in any way with the phrase  project
gutenberg    you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg tm license  available with this file or online at
http   www gutenberg org license  


section 1   general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg tm
electronic works

1 a   by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg tm
electronic work  you indicate that you have read  understand  agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 trademark copyright  agreement   if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement  you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in your possession 
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement  you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1 e 8 

1 b    project gutenberg  is a registered trademark   it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement   there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement   see
paragraph 1 c below   there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg tm electronic
works   see paragraph 1 e below 

1 c   the project gutenberg literary archive foundation   the foundation 
or pglaf   owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg tm electronic works   nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states   if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states  we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying  distributing  performing  displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed   of course  we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg tm name associated with
the work   you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg tm license when you share it without charge with others 

1 d   the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work   copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change   if you are outside the united states  check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading  copying  displaying  performing  distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg tm work   the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states 

1 e   unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg 

1 e 1   the following sentence  with active links to  or other immediate
access to  the full project gutenberg tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg tm work  any work on which the
phrase  project gutenberg  appears  or with which the phrase  project
gutenberg  is associated  is accessed  displayed  performed  viewed 
copied or distributed 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or
re use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www gutenberg org

1 e 2   if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain  does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder   the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges   if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase  project gutenberg  associated with or appearing on the
work  you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1 e 1
through 1 e 7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1 e 8 or
1 e 9 

1 e 3   if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder  your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder   additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work 

1 e 4   do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg tm
license terms from this work  or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg tm 

1 e 5   do not copy  display  perform  distribute or redistribute this
electronic work  or any part of this electronic work  without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1 e 1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg tm license 

1 e 6   you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary 
compressed  marked up  nonproprietary or proprietary form  including any
word processing or hypertext form   however  if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg tm work in a format other than
 plain vanilla ascii  or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg tm web site  www gutenberg org  
you must  at no additional cost  fee or expense to the user  provide a
copy  a means of exporting a copy  or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request  of the work in its original  plain vanilla ascii  or other
form   any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg tm
license as specified in paragraph 1 e 1 

1 e 7   do not charge a fee for access to  viewing  displaying 
performing  copying or distributing any project gutenberg tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 

1 e 8   you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works provided
that

  you pay a royalty fee of 20  of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes   the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark  but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation   royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare  or are legally required to prepare  your periodic tax
     returns   royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4   information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation  

  you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing  or by e mail  within 30 days of receipt that s he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg tm
     license   you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg tm works 

  you provide  in accordance with paragraph 1 f 3  a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy  if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work 

  you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg tm works 

1 e 9   if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement  you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart  the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark   contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below 

1 f 

1 f 1   project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify  do copyright research on  transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg tm
collection   despite these efforts  project gutenberg tm electronic
works  and the medium on which they may be stored  may contain
 defects   such as  but not limited to  incomplete  inaccurate or
corrupt data  transcription errors  a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement  a defective or damaged disk or other medium  a
computer virus  or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment 

1 f 2   limited warranty  disclaimer of damages   except for the  right
of replacement or refund  described in paragraph 1 f 3  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation  the owner of the project
gutenberg tm trademark  and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg tm electronic work under this agreement  disclaim all
liability to you for damages  costs and expenses  including legal
fees   you agree that you have no remedies for negligence  strict
liability  breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3   you agree that the foundation  the
trademark owner  and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual  direct  indirect  consequential  punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage 

1 f 3   limited right of replacement or refund   if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it  you can
receive a refund of the money  if any  you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from   if you
received the work on a physical medium  you must return the medium with
your written explanation   the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund   if you received the work electronically  the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund   if the second copy
is also defective  you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem 

1 f 4   except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1 f 3  this work is provided to you  as is   with no other
warranties of any kind  express or implied  including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose 

1 f 5   some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement  the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law   the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions 

1 f 6   indemnity   you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation  the
trademark owner  any agent or employee of the foundation  anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement  and any volunteers associated with the production 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg tm electronic works 
harmless from all liability  costs and expenses  including legal fees 
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur   a  distribution of this or any project gutenberg tm
work   b  alteration  modification  or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg tm work  and  c  any defect you cause 


section  2   information about the mission of project gutenberg tm

project gutenberg tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete  old  middle aged and new computers   it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life 

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need  is critical to reaching project gutenberg tm s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come   in 2001  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg tm and future generations 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help  see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http   www gutenberg org fundraising pglaf 


section 3   information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501 c  3  educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service   the foundation s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64 6221541   contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u s  federal laws and your state s laws 

the foundation s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr  s 
fairbanks  ak  99712   but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations   its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west  salt lake city  ut 84116   801  596 1887  email
business pglaf org   email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation s web site and official
page at http   www gutenberg org about contact

for additional contact information 
     dr  gregory b  newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby pglaf org

section 4   information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment   many small donations
  1 to  5 000  are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs 

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states   compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort  much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements   we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance   to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http   www gutenberg org fundraising donate

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements  we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate 

international donations are gratefully accepted  but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states   u s  laws alone swamp our small staff 

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses   donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks  online payments and credit card donations 
to donate  please visit 
http   www gutenberg org fundraising donate


section 5   general information about project gutenberg tm electronic
works 

professor michael s  hart is the originator of the project gutenberg tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone   for thirty years  he produced and distributed project
gutenberg tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support 

project gutenberg tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions  all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u s 
unless a copyright notice is included   thus  we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition 

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility 

     http   www gutenberg org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg tm 
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation  how to help produce our new ebooks  and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks 

