the project gutenberg ebook of history of the expedition under the command
of captains lewis and clark  vol  i   by meriwether lewis and william clark

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or
re use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www gutenberg net


title  history of the expedition under the command of captains lewis and clark  vol  i 
       to the sources of the missouri  thence across the rocky
       mountains and down the river columbia to the pacific ocean 
       performed during the years 1804 5 6 

author  meriwether lewis and william clark

editor  paul allen

release date  august 20  2005  ebook  16565 

language  english

character set encoding  ascii

    start of this project gutenberg ebook lewis and clark  i     





                                                                
             transcriber s note  every effort has been made     
           to replicate this text as faithfully as possible     
           including obsolete and variant spellings and other   
           inconsistencies  where the text has been changed to  
           correct an obvious error by the publisher  the word  
           has been marked with an asterisk   please note that  
           as this ascii version of the text does not support   
           the degree symbol or ligatures  these have been      
           replaced with the appropriate word or letters        
                                                                




 illustration  a map of lewis and clark s track  across the western
portion of north america  from the mississippi to the pacific ocean  by
order of the executive of the united states  in 1804  5 6 
copied by samuel lewis from the original drawing by wm  clark  




                                history

                                  of

                            the expedition

                          under the command of

                        captains lewis and clark  

                                   to

                      the sources of the missouri 

                                 thence

                       across the rocky mountains

                              and down the

                   river columbia to the pacific ocean 

                   performed during the years 1804 5 6 


                             by order of the

                     government of the united states 



                         prepared for the press
                         by paul allen  esquire 
                            in two volumes 

                                vol  i 


                              philadelphia 

                  published by bradford and inskeep  and
                        abm  h  inskeep  new york 
                           j  maxwell  printer
                                  1814 




district of pennsylvania  to wit 

     be it remembered  that on the twenty second day of january  in the
     thirty eighth year of the independence of the united states of
     america  a d  1814  bradford and inskeep  of the said district 
     have deposited in this office the title of a book  the right
     whereof they claim as proprietors  in the words following  to wit 

      history of the expedition under the command of captains lewis and
     clark  to the sources of the missouri  thence across the rocky
     mountains  and down the river columbia to the pacific ocean 
     performed during the years 1804 5 6  by order of the government of
     the united states  prepared for the press by paul allen  esquire  

     in conformity to the act of congress of the united states  entitled
      an act for the encouragement of learning  by securing the copies
     of maps  charts  and books  to the authors and proprietors of such
     copies during the times therein mentioned   and also to the act 
     entitled   an act supplementary to an act  entitled   an act for
     the encouragement of learning  by securing the copies of maps 
     charts  and books  to the authors and proprietors of such copies
     during the times therein mentioned   and extending the benefits
     thereof to the arts of designing  engraving  and etching historical
     and other prints  
                                             david caldwell 
                                clerk of the district of pennsylvania 




                                preface 


in presenting these volumes to the public  the editor owes equally to
himself and to others  to state the circumstances which have preceded
the publication  and to explain his own share in compiling them 

it was the original design of captain lewis to have been himself the
editor of his own travels  and he was on his way towards philadelphia
for that purpose when his sudden death frustrated these intentions 
after a considerable and unavoidable delay  the papers connected with
the expedition were deposited with another gentleman  who  in order to
render the lapse of time as little injurious as possible  proceeded
immediately to collect and investigate all the materials within his
reach 

of the incidents of each day during the expedition  a minute journal was
kept by captain lewis or captain clark  and sometimes by both  which was
afterwards revised and enlarged at the different periods of leisure
which occurred on the route  these were carefully perused in conjunction
with captain clark himself  who was able from his own recollection of
the journey  as well as from a constant residence in louisiana since his
return  to supply a great mass of explanations  and much additional
information with regard to part of the route which has been more
recently explored  besides these  recourse was had to the manuscript
journals kept by two of the serjeants  one of which  the least minute
and valuable  has already been published  that nothing might be wanting
to the accuracy of these details  a very intelligent and active member
of the party  mr  george shannon  was sent to contribute whatever his
memory might add to this accumulated fund of information 

from these copious materials the narrative was sketched nearly in its
present form  when other pursuits diverted the attention of the writer 
and compelled him to transfer his manuscript  in its unfinished state 
with all the documents connected with it  to the present editor  to
prepare them for the press and superintend the publication  that he may
not seem to arrogate any thing from the exertions of others  he should
therefore state that  although the whole work was thus submitted to his
entire discretion  he found but little to change  and that his labour
has been principally confined to revising the manuscript  comparing it
with the original papers  and inserting such additional matter as
appears to have been intentionally deferred by the writer till the
period of a more mature revisal  these circumstances  which would
otherwise be indifferent to the public  are mentioned merely to account
for imperfections  which are in some degree inseparable from any book
of travels not written by the traveller  in a work of pure description
indeed  like the present  where the incidents themselves are the sole
objects of attraction  the part of an editor is necessarily subordinate 
nor can his humble pretensions aspire beyond the merit of rigid
adherence to facts as they are stated to him  this has been very
diligently attempted  and for this  in its full extent  the editor deems
himself responsible 

the present volumes  it will be perceived  comprise only the narrative
of the journey  those parts of the work which relate to the various
objects of natural history  observed or collected during the journey 
as well as the alphabets of the indian languages  are in the hands of
professor bartou  and will  it is understood  shortly appear 

to give still further interest to the work  the editor addressed a
letter to mr  jefferson  requesting some authentic memoirs of captain
lewis  for the very curious and valuable information contained in his
answer  the public  as well as the editor himself  owe great obligations
to the politeness and knowledge of that distinguished gentleman 

                                                       paul allen 
philadelphia  january 1  1814 




                       life of captain lewis 

                                           monticello  august 18  1813  
sir 

in compliance with the request conveyed in your letter of may 25  i have
endeavoured to obtain  from the relations and friends of the late
governor lewis  information of such incidents of his life as might be
not unacceptable to those who may read the narrative of his western
discoveries  the ordinary occurrences of a private life  and those also
while acting in a subordinate sphere in the army  in a time of peace 
are not deemed sufficiently interesting to occupy the public attention 
but a general account of his parentage  with such smaller incidents as
marked his early character are briefly noted  and to these are added  as
being peculiarly within my own knowledge  whatever related to the public
mission  of which an account is now to be published  the result of my
inquiries and recollections shall now be offered  to be enlarged or
abridged as you may think best  or otherwise to be used with the
materials you may have collected from other sources 

meriwether lewis  late governor of louisiana  was born on the eighteenth
of august  1774  near the town of charlottesville  in the county of
albemarle  in virginia  of one of the distinguished families of that
state  john lewis  one of his father s uncles was a member of the
king s council  before the revolution  another of them  fielding lewis 
married a sister of general washington  his father  william lewis  was
the youngest of five sons of colonel robert lewis  of albemarle  the
fourth of whom  charles  was one of the early patriots who stepped
forward in the commencement of the revolution and commanded one of the
regiments first raised in virginia  and placed on continental
establishment  happily situated at home  with a wife and young family 
and a fortune placing him at ease  he left all to aid in the liberation
of his country from foreign usurpations  then first unmasking their
ultimate end and aim  his good sense  integrity  bravery  enterprise 
and remarkable bodily powers  marked him as an officer of great promise 
but he unfortunately died early in the revolution  nicholas lewis  the
second of his father s brothers  commanded a regiment of militia in the
successful expedition of 1776  against the cherokee indians  who 
seduced by the agents of the british government to take up the hatchet
against us  had committed great havoc on our southern frontier  by
murdering and scalping helpless women and children  according to their
cruel and cowardly principles of warfare  the chastisement they then
received closed the history of their wars  and prepared them for
receiving the elements of civilization  which  zealously inculcated by
the present government of the united states  have rendered them an
industrious  peaceable  and happy people  this member of the family of
lewises  whose bravery was so usefully proved on this occasion  was
endeared to all who knew him by his inflexible probity  courteous
disposition  benevolent heart  and engaging modesty and manners  he was
the umpire of all the private differences of his county  selected always
by both parties  he was also the guardian of meriwether lewis  of whom
we are now to speak  and who had lost his father at an early age  he
continued some years under the fostering care of a tender mother  of the
respectable family of meriwethers  of the same county  and was
remarkable even in infancy for enterprise  boldness  and discretion 
when only eight years of age he habitually went out  in the dead of
night  alone with his dogs  into the forest to hunt the raccoon and
opossum  which  seeking their food in the night  can then only be taken 
in this exercise  no season or circumstance could obstruct his
purpose  plunging through the winter s snows and frozen streams in
pursuit of his object  at thirteen he was put to the latin school  and
continued at that until eighteen  when he returned to his mother  and
entered on the cares of his farm  having  as well as a younger brother 
been left by his father with a competency for all the correct and
comfortable purposes of temperate life  his talent for observation 
which had led him to an accurate knowledge of the plants and animals of
his own country  would have distinguished him as a farmer  but at the
age of twenty  yielding to the ardour of youth  and a passion for more
dazzling pursuits  he engaged as a volunteer in the body of militia
which were called out by general washington  on occasion of the
discontents produced by the excise taxes in the western parts of the
united states  and from that situation he was removed to the regular
service as a lieutenant in the line  at twenty three he was promoted to
a captaincy  and  always attracting the first attention where
punctuality and fidelity were requisite  he was appointed paymaster to
his regiment  about this time a circumstance occurred which  leading to
the transaction which is the subject of this book  will justify a
recurrence to its original idea  while i resided in paris  john ledyard 
of connecticut  arrived there  well known in the united states for
energy of body and mind  he had accompanied captain cook on his voyage
to the pacific ocean  and distinguished himself on that voyage by his
intrepidity  being of a roaming disposition  he was now panting for some
new enterprise  his immediate object at paris was to engage a mercantile
company in the fur trade of the western coast of america  in which 
however  he failed  i then proposed to him to go by land to kamschatka 
cross in some of the russian vessels to nootka sound  fall down into the
latitude of the missouri  and penetrate to  and through  that to the
united states  he eagerly seized the idea  and only asked to be assured
of the permission of the russian government  i interested  in obtaining
that  m  de simoulin  minister plenipotentiary of the empress at paris 
but more especially the baron de grimm  minister plenipotentiary of
saxe gotha  her more special agent and correspondent there in matters
not immediately diplomatic  her permission was obtained  and an
assurance of protection while the course of the voyage should be through
her territories  ledyard set out from paris  and arrived at st 
petersburgh after the empress had left that place to pass the winter  i
think  at moscow  his finances not permitting him to make unnecessary
stay at st  petersburgh  he left it with a passport from one of the
ministers  and at two hundred miles from kamschatka  was obliged to take
up his winter quarters  he was preparing  in the spring  to resume his
journey  when he was arrested by an officer of the empress  who by this
time had changed her mind  and forbidden his proceeding  he was put into
a close carriage  and conveyed day and night  without ever stopping 
till they reached poland  where he was set down and left to himself  the
fatigue of this journey broke down his constitution  and when he
returned to paris his bodily strength was much impaired  his mind 
however  remained firm  and he after this undertook the journey to
egypt  i received a letter from him  full of sanguine hopes  dated at
cairo  the fifteenth of november  1788  the day before he was to set out
for the head of the nile  on which day  however  he ended his career and
life  and thus failed the first attempt to explore the western part of
our northern continent 

in 1792  i proposed to the american philosophical society that we should
set on foot a subscription to engage some competent person to explore
that region in the opposite direction  that is  by ascending the
missouri  crossing the stony mountains  and descending the nearest river
to the pacific  captain lewis being then stationed at charlottesville 
on the recruiting service  warmly solicited me to obtain for him the
execution of that object  i told him it was proposed that the person
engaged should be attended by a single companion only  to avoid exciting
alarm among the indians  this did not deter him  but mr  andre michaux 
a professed botanist  author of the flora boreali americana  and of the
histoire des chesnes d amerique  offering his services  they were
accepted  he received his instructions  and when he had reached kentucky
in the prosecution of his journey  he was overtaken by an order from the
minister of france  then at philadelphia  to relinquish the expedition 
and to pursue elsewhere the botanical inquiries on which he was employed
by that government  and thus failed the second attempt for exploring
that region 

in 1803  the act for establishing trading houses with the indian tribes
being about to expire  some modifications of it were recommended to
congress by a confidential message of january 18th  and an extension of
its views to the indians on the missouri  in order to prepare the way 
the message proposed the sending an exploring party to trace the
missouri to its source  to cross the highlands  and follow the best
water communication which offered itself from thence to the pacific
ocean  congress approved the proposition  and voted a sum of money for
carrying it into execution  captain lewis  who had then been near two
years with me as private secretary  immediately renewed his
solicitations to have the direction of the party  i had now had
opportunities of knowing him intimately  of courage undaunted 
possessing a firmness and perseverance of purpose which nothing but
impossibilities could divert from its direction  careful as a father of
those committed to his charge  yet steady in the maintenance of order
and discipline  intimate with the indian character  customs  and
principles  habituated to the hunting life  guarded  by exact
observation of the vegetables and animals of his own country  against
losing time in the description of objects already possessed  honest 
disinterested  liberal  of sound understanding  and a fidelity to truth
so scrupulous  that whatever he should report would be as certain as if
seen by ourselves  with all these qualifications  as if selected and
implanted by nature in one body for this express purpose  i could have
no hesitation in confiding the enterprise to him  to fill up the measure
desired  he wanted nothing but a greater familiarity with the technical
language of the natural sciences  and readiness in the astronomical
observations necessary for the geography of his route  to acquire these
he repaired immediately to philadelphia  and placed himself under the
tutorage of the distinguished professors of that place  who with a zeal
and emulation  enkindled by an ardent devotion to science  communicated
to him freely the information requisite for the purposes of the journey 
while attending too  at lancaster  the fabrication of the arms with
which he chose that his men should be provided  he had the benefit of
daily communication with mr  andrew ellicot  whose experience in
astronomical observation  and practice of it in the woods  enabled him
to apprise captain lewis of the wants and difficulties he would
encounter  and of the substitutes and resources offered by a woodland
and uninhabited country 

deeming it necessary he should have some person with him of known
competence to the direction of the enterprise  in the event of accident
to himself  he proposed william clarke  brother of general george rogers
clarke  who was approved  and  with that view  received a commission of
captain 

in april  1803  a draught of his instructions was sent to captain lewis 
and on the twentieth of june they were signed in the following form 

      to meriwether lewis  esquire  captain of the first regiment of
     infantry of the united states of america 

      your situation as secretary of the president of the united states 
     has made you acquainted with the objects of my confidential message
     of january 18  1803  to the legislature  you have seen the act they
     passed  which  though expressed in general terms  was meant to
     sanction those objects  and you are appointed to carry them into
     execution 

      instruments for ascertaining  by celestial observations  the
     geography of the country through which you will pass  have been
     already provided  light articles for barter and presents among the
     indians  arms for your attendants  say for from ten to twelve men 
     boats  tents  and other travelling apparatus  with ammunition 
     medicine  surgical instruments  and provisions  you will have
     prepared  with such aids as the secretary at war can yield in his
     department  and from him also you will receive authority to engage
     among our troops  by voluntary agreement  the number of attendants
     abovementioned  over whom you  as their commanding officer  are
     invested with all the powers the laws give in such a case 

      as your movements  while within the limits of the united states 
     will be better directed by occasional communications  adapted to
     circumstances as they arise  they will not be noticed here  what
     follows will respect your proceedings after your departure from the
     united states 

      your mission has been communicated to the ministers here from
     france  spain  and great britain  and through them to their
     governments  and such assurances given them as to its objects  as
     we trust will satisfy them  the country of louisiana having been
     ceded by spain to france  the passport you have from the minister
     of france  the representative of the present sovereign of the
     country  will be a protection with all its subjects  and that from
     the minister of england will entitle you to the friendly aid of any
     traders of that allegiance with whom you may happen to meet 

      the object of your mission is to explore the missouri river  and
     such principal streams of it  as  by its course and communication
     with the waters of the pacific ocean  whether the columbia  oregan 
     colorado  or any other river  may offer the most direct and
     practicable water communication across the continent  for the
     purposes of commerce 

      beginning at the mouth of the missouri  you will take observations
     of latitude and longitude  at all remarkable points on the river 
     and especially at the mouths of rivers  at rapids  at islands  and
     other places and objects distinguished by such natural marks and
     characters  of a durable kind  as that they may with certainty be
     recognised hereafter  the courses of the river between these points
     of observation may be supplied by the compass  the log line  and by
     time  corrected by the observations themselves  the variations of
     the needle  too  in different places  should be noticed 

      the interesting points of the portage between the heads of the
     missouri  and of the water offering the best communication with the
     pacific ocean  should also be fixed by observation  and the course
     of that water to the ocean  in the same manner as that of the
     missouri 

      your observations are to be taken with great pains and accuracy 
     to be entered distinctly and intelligibly for others as well as
     yourself  to comprehend all the elements necessary  with the aid of
     the usual tables  to fix the latitude and longitude of the places
     at which they were taken  and are to be rendered to the war office 
     for the purpose of having the calculations made concurrently by
     proper persons within the united states  several copies of these 
     as well as of your other notes  should be made at leisure times 
     and put into the care of the most trust worthy of your attendants
     to guard  by multiplying them against the accidental losses to
     which they will be exposed  a further guard would be  that one of
     these copies be on the cuticular membranes of the paper birch  as
     less liable to injury from damp than common paper 

      the commerce which may be carried on with the people inhabiting
     the line you will pursue  renders a knowledge of those people
     important  you will therefore endeavour to make yourself
     acquainted  as far as a diligent pursuit of your journey shall
     admit  with the names of the nations and their numbers 

      the extent and limits of their possessions 

      their relations with other tribes or nations 

      their language  traditions  monuments 

      their ordinary occupations in agriculture  fishing  hunting  war 
     arts  and the implements for these 

      their food  clothing  and domestic accommodations 

      the diseases prevalent among them  and the remedies they use 

      moral and physical circumstances which distinguish them from the
     tribes we know 

      peculiarities in their laws  customs  and dispositions 

      and articles of commerce they may need or furnish  and to what
     extent 

      and  considering the interest which every nation has in extending
     and strengthening the authority of reason and justice among the
     people around them  it will be useful to acquire what knowledge you
     can of the state of morality  religion  and information among them 
     as it may better enable those who may endeavour to civilize and
     instruct them  to adapt their measures to the existing notions and
     practices of those on whom they are to operate 

      other objects worthy of notice will be  

      the soil and face of the country  its growth and vegetable
     productions  especially those not of the united states 

      the animals of the country generally  and especially those not
     known in the united states 

      the remains and accounts of any which may be deemed rare or
     extinct 

      the mineral productions of every kind  but more particularly
     metals  lime stone  pit coal  and saltpetre  salines and mineral
     waters  noting the temperature of the last  and such circumstances
     as may indicate their character 

      volcanic appearances 

      climate  as characterized by the thermometer  by the proportion of
     rainy  cloudy  and clear days  by lightning  hail  snow  ice  by
     the access and recess of frost  by the winds prevailing at
     different seasons  the dates at which particular plants put forth 
     or lose their flower or leaf  times of appearance of particular
     birds  reptiles or insects 

      although your route will be along the channel of the missouri  yet
     you will endeavour to inform yourself  by inquiry  of the character
     and extent of the country watered by its branches  and especially
     on its southern side  the north river  or rio bravo  which runs
     into the gulf of mexico  and the north river  or rio colorado 
     which runs into the gulf of california  are understood to be the
     principal streams heading opposite to the waters of the missouri 
     and running southwardly  whether the dividing grounds between the
     missouri and them are mountains or flat lands  what are their
     distance from the missouri  the character of the intermediate
     country  and the people inhabiting it  are worthy of particular
     inquiry  the northern waters of the missouri are less to be
     inquired after  because they have been ascertained to a
     considerable degree  and are still in a course of ascertainment by
     english traders and travellers  but if you can learn any thing
     certain of the most northern source of the missisipi  and of its
     position relatively to the lake of the woods  it will be
     interesting to us  some account too of the path of the canadian
     traders from the missisipi  at the mouth of the onisconsing to
     where it strikes the missouri  and of the soil and rivers in its
     course  is desirable 

      in all your intercourse with the natives  treat them in the most
     friendly and conciliatory manner which their own conduct will
     admit  allay all jealousies as to the object of your journey 
     satisfy them of its innocence  make them acquainted with the
     position  extent  character  peaceable and commercial dispositions
     of the united states  of our wish to be neighbourly  friendly  and
     useful to them  and of our dispositions to a commercial intercourse
     with them  confer with them on the points most convenient as mutual
     emporiums  and the articles of most desirable interchange for them
     and us  if a few of their influential chiefs  within practicable
     distance  wish to visit us  arrange such a visit with them  and
     furnish them with authority to call on our officers on their
     entering the united states  to have them conveyed to this place at
     the public expense  if any of them should wish to have some of
     their young people brought up with us  and taught such arts as may
     be useful to them  we will receive  instruct  and take care of
     them  such a mission  whether of influential chiefs  or of young
     people  would give some security to your own party  carry with you
     some matter of the kine pox  inform those of them with whom you may
     be of its efficacy as a preservative from the small pox  and
     instruct and encourage them in the use of it  this may be
     especially done wherever you winter 

      as it is impossible for us to foresee in what manner you will be
     received by those people  whether with hospitality or hostility  so
     is it impossible to prescribe the exact degree of perseverance with
     which you are to pursue your journey  we value too much the lives
     of citizens to offer them to probable destruction  your numbers
     will be sufficient to secure you against the unauthorized
     opposition of individuals  or of small parties  but if a superior
     force  authorized  or not authorized  by a nation  should be
     arrayed against your further passage  and inflexibly determined to
     arrest it  you must decline its further pursuit and return  in the
     loss of yourselves we should lose also the information you will
     have acquired  by returning safely with that  you may enable us to
     renew the essay with better calculated means  to your own
     discretion  therefore  must be left the degree of danger you may
     risk  and the point at which you should decline  only saying  we
     wish you to err on the side of your safety  and to bring back your
     party safe  even if it be with less information 

      as far up the missouri as the white settlements extend  an
     intercourse will probably be found to exist between them and the
     spanish posts of st  louis opposite cahokia  or st  genevieve
     opposite kaskaskia  from still further up the river the traders may
     furnish a conveyance for letters  beyond that you may perhaps be
     able to engage indians to bring letters for the government to
     cahokia  or kaskaskia  on promising that they shall there receive
     such special compensation as you shall have stipulated with them 
     avail yourself of these means to communicate to us  at seasonable
     intervals  a copy of your journal  notes and observations of every
     kind  putting into cypher whatever might do injury if betrayed 

      should you reach the pacific ocean  inform yourself of the
     circumstances which may decide whether the furs of those parts may
     not be collected as advantageously at the head of the missouri
      convenient as is supposed to the waters of the colorado and oregan
     or columbia  as at nootka sound  or any other point of that coast 
     and that trade be consequently conducted through the missouri and
     united states more beneficially than by the circumnavigation now
     practised 

      on your arrival on that coast  endeavour to learn if there be any
     port within your reach frequented by the sea vessels of any nation 
     and to send two of your trusty people back by sea  in such way as
     shall appear practicable  with a copy of your notes  and should you
     be of opinion that the return of your party by the way they went
     will be imminently dangerous  then ship the whole  and return by
     sea  by the way either of cape horn  or the cape of good hope  as
     you shall be able  as you will be without money  clothes  or
     provisions  you must endeavour to use the credit of the united
     states to obtain them  for which purpose open letters of credit
     shall be furnished you  authorizing you to draw on the executive of
     the united states  or any of its officers  in any part of the
     world  on which draughts can be disposed of  and to apply with our
     recommendations to the consuls  agents  merchants  or citizens of
     any nation with which we have intercourse  assuring them  in our
     name  that any aids they may furnish you shall be honourably
     repaid  and on demand  our consuls  thomas hewes  at batavia  in
     java  william buchanan  in the isles of france and bourbon  and
     john elmslie  at the cape of good hope  will be able to supply your
     necessities  by draughts on us 

      should you find it safe to return by the way you go  after sending
     two of your party round by sea  or with your whole party  if no
     conveyance by sea can be found  do so  making such observations on
     your return as may serve to supply  correct  or confirm those made
     on your outward journey 

      on reentering the united states and reaching a place of safety 
     discharge any of your attendants who may desire and deserve it 
     procuring for them immediate payment of all arrears of pay and
     clothing which may have incurred since their departure  and assure
     them that they shall be recommended to the liberality of the
     legislature for the grant of a soldier s portion of land each  as
     proposed in my message to congress  and repair yourself  with your
     papers  to the seat of government 

      to provide  on the accident of your death  against anarchy 
     dispersion  and the consequent danger to your party  and total
     failure of the enterprise  you are hereby authorized  by any
     instrument signed and written in your own hand  to name the person
     among them who shall succeed to the command on your decease  and by
     like instruments to change the nomination  from time to time  as
     further experience of the characters accompanying you shall point
     out superior fitness  and all the powers and authorities given to
     yourself are  in the event of your death  transferred to  and
     vested in the successor so named  with further power to him and his
     successors  in like manner to name each his successor  who  on the
     death of his predecessor  shall be invested with all the powers and
     authorities given to yourself  given under my hand at the city of
     washington  this twentieth day of june  1803 

                                         thomas jefferson 
                            president of the united states of america   


while these things were going on here  the country of louisiana  lately
ceded by spain to france  had been the subject of negotiation at paris
between us and this last power  and had actually been transferred to us
by treaties executed at paris on the thirtieth of april  this
information  received about the first day of july  increased infinitely
the interest we felt in the expedition  and lessened the apprehensions
of interruption from other powers  every thing in this quarter being now
prepared  captain lewis left washington on the fifth of july  1803  and
proceeded to pittsburg  where other articles had been ordered to be
provided for him  the men too were to be selected from the military
stations on the ohio  delays of preparation  difficulties of navigation
down the ohio  and other untoward obstructions  retarded his arrival at
cahokia until the season was so far advanced as to render it prudent to
suspend his entering the missouri before the ice should break up in the
succeeding spring 

from this time his journal  now published  will give the history of his
journey to and from the pacific ocean  until his return to st  louis on
the twenty third of september  1806  never did a similar event excite
more joy through the united states  the humblest of its citizens had
taken a lively interest in the issue of this journey  and looked forward
with impatience for the information it would furnish  their anxieties
too for the safety of the corps had been kept in a state of excitement
by lugubrious rumours  circulated from time to time on uncertain
authorities  and uncontradicted by letters  or other direct information 
from the time they had left the mandan towns  on their ascent up the
river in april of the preceding year  1805  until their actual return to
st  louis 

it was the middle of february  1807  before captain lewis  with his
companion captain clarke  reached the city of washington  where congress
was then in session  that body granted to the two chiefs and their
followers the donation of lands which they had been encouraged to expect
in reward of their toil and dangers  captain lewis was soon after
appointed governor of louisiana  and captain clarke a general of its
militia  and agent of the united states for indian affairs in that
department 

a considerable time intervened before the governor s arrival at st 
louis  he found the territory distracted by feuds and contentions among
the officers of the government  and the people themselves divided by
these into factions and parties  he determined at once to take no side
with either  but to use every endeavour to conciliate and harmonize
them  the even handed justice he administered to all soon established a
respect for his person and authority  and perseverance and time wore
down animosities  and reunited the citizens again into one family 

governor lewis had  from early life  been subject to hypochondriac
affections  it was a constitutional disposition in all the nearer
branches of the family of his name  and was more immediately inherited
by him from his father  they had not  however  been so strong as to give
uneasiness to his family  while he lived with me in washington i
observed at times sensible depressions of mind  but knowing their
constitutional source  i estimated their course by what i had seen in
the family  during his western expedition  the constant exertion which
that required of all the faculties of body and mind  suspended these
distressing affections  but after his establishment at st  louis in
sedentary occupations  they returned upon him with redoubled vigour  and
began seriously to alarm his friends  he was in a paroxysm of one of
these  when his affairs rendered it necessary for him to go to
washington  he proceeded to the chickasaw bluffs  where he arrived on
the sixteenth of september  1809  with a view of continuing his journey
thence by water  mr  neely  agent of the united states with the
chickasaw indians  arriving there two days after  found him extremely
indisposed  and betraying at times some symptoms of a derangement of
mind  the rumours of a war with england  and apprehensions that he might
lose the papers he was bringing on  among which were the vouchers of his
public accounts  and the journals and papers of his western expedition 
induced him here to change his mind  and to take his course by land
through the chickasaw country  although he appeared somewhat relieved 
mr  neely kindly determined to accompany and watch over him 
unfortunately  at their encampment  after having passed the tennessee
one day s journey  they lost two horses  which obliging mr  neely to
halt for their recovery  the governor proceeded  under a promise to wait
for him at the house of the first white inhabitant on his road  he
stopped at the house of a mr  grinder  who not being at home  his wife 
alarmed at the symptoms of derangement she discovered  gave him up the
house and retired to rest herself in an out house  the governor s and
neely s servants lodging in another  about three o clock in the night he
did the deed which plunged his friends into affliction  and deprived his
country of one of her most valued citizens  whose valour and
intelligence would have been now employed in avenging the wrongs of his
country  and in emulating by land the splendid deeds which have honoured
her arms on the ocean  it lost too to the nation the benefit of
receiving from his own hand the narrative now offered them of his
sufferings and successes  in endeavouring to extend for them the
boundaries of science  and to present to their knowledge that vast and
fertile country  which their sons are destined to fill with arts  with
science  with freedom and happiness 

to this melancholy close of the life of one  whom posterity will declare
not to have lived in vain  i have only to add  that all the facts i have
stated are either known to myself  or communicated by his family or
others  for whose truth i have no hesitation to make myself responsible 
and i conclude with tendering you the assurances of my respect and
consideration 

                                                  th  jefferson 

mr  paul allen  philadelphia 




                                contents 

                                 vol  i 


                                chapter i 

          the party set out on the expedition and pass wood
          river  description of the town of st  charles  osage
          woman river  gasconade and osage rivers described 
          character of the osage indians  curious traditionary
          account of their origin  the party proceed and pass
          the mine river  the two charitons  the kanzas 
          nodawa  newahaw  neeshuabatona  little nemahar  each
          of which are particularly described  they encamp at
          the mouth of the river platte  a particular
          description of the surrounding country  the various
          creeks  bays  islands  prairies   c  given in the
          course of the route                                     1


                               chapter ii 

          some account of the pawnee indians  council held
          with the otto and missouri indians  council held
          with another party of the ottoes  death of sergeant
          floyd  the party encamp near the mouth of whitestone
          river  the character of the missouri  with the
          rivers that enter it  the surrounding country  the
          various islands  bays  creeks   c  given in the
          course of the expedition                               32


                              chapter iii 

          whimsical instance of superstition of the sioux
          indians  council held with the sioux  character of
          that tribe  their manners   c  a ridiculous instance
          of their heroism  ancient fortifications  quieurre
          river described  vast herds of buffaloe  account of
          the petit chien or little dog  narrow escape of
          george shannon  description of white river 
          surprising fleetness of the antelope  pass the river
          of the sioux  description of the grand le tour  or
          great bend  encamp on the teton river                  52


                               chapter iv 

          council held with the tetons  their manners  dances 
           c  cheyenne river described  council held with the
          ricara indians  their manners and habits  strange
          instance of ricara idolatry  another instance 
          cannonball river  arrival among the mandans 
          character of the surrounding country  and of the
          creeks  islands   c                                    82


                                chapter v 

          council held with the mandans  a prairie on fire 
          and a singular instance of preservation  peace
          established between the mandans and ricaras  the
          party encamp for the winter  indian mode of catching
          goats  beautiful appearance of northern lights 
          friendly character of the indians  some account of
          the mandans  the anahaways and the minnetarees  the
          party acquire the confidence of the mandans by
          taking part in their controversy with the sioux 
          religion of the mandans  and their singular
          conception of the term medicine  their tradition 
          the sufferings of the party from the severity of the
          season  indian game of billiards described 
          character of the missouri  of the surrounding
          country  and of the rivers  creeks  islands   c       118


                               chapter vi 

          the party increase in the favour of the mandans 
          description of a buffaloe dance  medicine dance  the
          fortitude with which the indians bear the severity
          of the season  distress of the party for want of
          provisions  the great importance of the blacksmith
          in procuring it  depredations of the sioux  the
          homage paid to the medicine stone  summary act of
          justice among the minnetarees  the process by which
          the mandans and ricaras make beads  character of the
          missouri  of the surrounding country  and of the
          rivers  creeks  islands   c                           148


                               chapter vii 

          indian method of attacking the buffaloe on the ice 
          an enumeration of the presents sent to the president
          of the united states  the party are visited by a
          ricara chief  they leave their encampment  and
          proceed on their journey  description of the little
          missouri  some account of the assiniboins  their
          mode of burying the dead  whiteearth river
          described  great quantity of salt discovered on its
          banks  yellowstone river described  a particular
          account of the country at the confluence of the
          yellowstone and missouri  description of the
          missouri  the surrounding country  and of the
          rivers  creeks  islands   c                           174


                               chapter viii 

          unusual appearance of salt  the formidable character
          of the white bear  porcupine river described 
          beautiful appearance of the surrounding country 
          immense quantities of game  milk river described 
          extraordinary character of bigdry river  an instance
          of uncommon tenacity of life in a white bear  narrow
          escape of one of the party from that animal  a still
          more remarkable instance  muscleshell river
          described                                             199


                               chapter ix 

          the party continue their route  description of
          judith river  indian mode of taking the buffaloe 
          slaughter river described  phenomena of nature  of
          walls on the banks of the missouri  the party encamp
          on the banks of the river to ascertain which of the
          streams constitute the missouri  captain lewis
          leaves the party to explore the northern fork  and
          captain clarke explores the southern  the
          surrounding country described in the route of
          captain lewis  narrow escape of one of his party 
                                                                225


                               chapter x 

          return of captain lewis  account of captain clarke s
          researches with his exploring party  perilous
          situation of one of his party  tansy river
          described  the party still believing the southern
          fork the missouri  captain lewis is resolves to
          ascend it  mode of making a place to deposit
          provisions  called cache  captain lewis explores the
          southern fork  falls of the missouri discovered 
          which ascertains the question  romantic scenery of
          the surrounding country  narrow escape of captain
          lewis  the main body under captain clarke approach
          within five miles of the falls  and prepare for
          making a portage over the rapids                      251


                               chapter xi 

          description and romantic appearance of the missouri
          at the junction of the medicine river  the
          difficulty of transporting the baggage at the falls 
          the party employed in the construction of a boat of
          skins  the embarrassments they had to encounter for
          the want of proper materials  during the work the
          party much troubled by white bears  violent
          hail storm  and providential escape of captain
          clarke and his party  description of a remarkable
          fountain  singular explosion heard from the black
          mountains  the boat found to be insufficient  and
          the serious disappointment of the party  captain
          clarke undertakes to repair the damage by building
          canoes  and accomplishes the task                     275


                              chapter xii 

          the party embark on board the canoes  description of
          smith s river  character of the country   c 
          dearborne s river described  captain clarke precedes
          the party for the purpose of discovering the indians
          of the rocky mountains  magnificent rocky
          appearances on the borders of the river denominated
          the gates of the rocky mountains  captain clarke
          arrives at the three forks of the missouri without
          overtaking the indians  the party arrive at the
          three forks  of which a peculiar and interesting
          description is given                                  301


                              chapter xiii 

          the name of the missouri changed  as the river now
          divides itself into three forks  one of which is
          called after jefferson  the other madison  and the
          other after gallatin  their general character  the
          party ascend the jefferson branch  description of
          the river philosophy which enters into the
          jefferson  captain lewis and a small party go in
          advance in search of the shoshonees  description of
          the country   c  bordering on the river  captain
          lewis still preceding the main party in quest of the
          shoshonees  a singular accident which prevented
          captain clarke from following captain lewis s
          advice  and ascending the middle fork of the river 
          description of philanthropy river  another stream
          running into the jefferson  captain lewis and a
          small party having been unsuccessful in their first
          attempt  set off a second time in quest of the
          shoshonees                                            328


                              chapter xiv 

          captain lewis proceeds before the main body in
          search of the shoshonees  his ill success on the
          first interview  the party with captain lewis at
          length discover the source of the missouri  captain
          clarke with the main body still employed in
          ascending the missouri or jefferson river  captain
          lewis s second interview with the shoshonees
          attended with success  the interesting ceremonies of
          his first introduction to the natives  detailed at
          large  their hospitality  their mode of hunting the
          antelope  the difficulties encountered by captain
          clarke and the main body in ascending the river  the
          suspicions entertained of captain lewis by the
          shoshonees  and his mode of allaying them  the
          ravenous appetites of the savages illustrated by
          singular adventure  the indians still jealous  and
          the great pains taken by captain lewis to preserve
          their confidence  captain clarke arrives with the
          main body exhausted by the difficulties they
          underwent                                             354


                              chapter xv 

          affecting interview between the wife of chaboneau
          and the chief of the shoshonees  council held with
          that nation  and favourable result  the extreme
          navigable point of the missouri mentioned  general
          character of the river and of the country through
          which it passes  captain clarke in exploring the
          source of the columbia falls in company with another
          party of shoshonees  the geographical information
          acquired from one of that party  their manner of
          catching fish  the party reach lewis river  the
          difficulties which captain clarke had to encounter
          in his route  friendship and hospitality of the
          shoshonees  the party with captain lewis employed in
          making saddles  and preparing for the journey         381


                              chapter xvi 

          contest between drewyer and a shoshonee  the
          fidelity and honour of that tribe  the party set out
          on their journey  the conduct of cameahwait
          reproved  and himself reconciled  the easy
          parturition of the shoshonee women  history of this
          nation  their terror of the pawkees  their
          government and family economy in their treatment of
          their women  their complaints of spanish treachery 
          description of their weapons of warfare  their
          curious mode of making a shield  the caparison of
          their horses  the dress of the men and of the women
          particularly described  their mode of acquiring new
          names                                                 407


                              chapter xvii 

          the party  after procuring horses from the
          shoshonees  proceed on their journey through the
          mountains  the difficulties and dangers of the
          route  a council held with another band of the
          shoshonees  of whom some account is given  they are
          reduced to the necessity of killing their horses for
          food  captain clarke with a small party precedes the
          main body in quest of food  and is hospitably
          received by the pierced nose indians  arrival of the
          main body amongst this tribe  with whom a council is
          held  they resolve to perform the remainder of their
          journey in canoes  sickness of the party  they
          descend the kooskooskee to its junction with lewis
          river  after passing several dangerous rapids  short
          description of the manners and dress of the
          pierced nose indians                                  435




                      lewis and clarke s expedition

                             up the missouri 

                                chap  i 

     the party set out on the expedition and pass wood
     river  description of the town of st  charles  osage woman
     river  gasconade and osage rivers described  character of the
     osage indians  curious traditionary account of their origin  the
     party proceed and pass the mine river  the two charitons  the
     kanzas  nodawa  newahaw  neeshnabatona  little nemahar  each of
     which are particularly described  they encamp at the mouth of the
     river platte  a particular description of the surrounding
     country  the various creeks  bays  islands  prairies   c   given
     in the course of the route 


on the acquisition of louisiana  in the year 1803  the attention of the
government of the united states  was early directed towards exploring
and improving the new territory  accordingly in the summer of the same
year  an expedition was planned by the president for the purpose of
discovering the courses and sources of the missouri  and the most
convenient water communication thence to the pacific ocean  his private
secretary captain meriwether lewis  and captain william clarke  both
officers of the army of the united states  were associated in the
command of this enterprize  after receiving the requisite instructions 
captain lewis left the seat of government  and being joined by captain
clarke at louisville  in kentucky  proceeded to st  louis  where they
arrived in the month of december  their original  intention was to pass
the winter at la charrette  the highest settlement on the missouri  but
the spanish commandant of the province  not having received an official
account of its transfer to the united states  was obliged by the general
policy of his government  to prevent strangers from passing through the
spanish territory  they therefore encamped at the mouth of wood river 
on the eastern side of the mississippi  out of his jurisdiction  where
they passed the winter in disciplining the men  and making the necessary
preparations for setting out early in the spring  before which the
cession was officially announced  the party consisted of nine young men
from kentucky  fourteen soldiers of the united states army who
volunteered their services  two french watermen  an interpreter and
hunter  and a black servant belonging to captain clarke  all these 
except the last  were enlisted to serve as privates during the
expedition  and three sergeants appointed from amongst them by the
captains  in addition to these were engaged a corporal and six soldiers 
and nine watermen to accompany the expedition as far as the mandan
nation  in order to assist in carrying the stores  or repelling an
attack which was most to be apprehended between wood river and that
tribe  the necessary stores were subdivided into seven bales  and one
box  containing a small portion of each article in case of accident 
they consisted of a great variety of clothing  working utensils  locks 
flints  powder  ball  and articles of the greatest use  to these were
added fourteen bales and one box of indian presents  distributed in the
same manner  and composed of richly laced coats and other articles of
dress  medals  flags  knives  and tomahawks for the chiefs  ornaments of
different kinds  particularly beads  lookingglasses  handkerchiefs 
paints  and generally such articles as were deemed best calculated for
the taste of the indians  the party was to embark on board of three
boats  the first was a keel boat fifty five feet long  drawing three
feet water  carrying one large squaresail and twenty two oars  a deck of
ten feet in the bow  and stern formed a forecastle and cabin  while the
middle was covered by lockers  which might be raised so as to form a
breast work in case of attack  this was accompanied by two perioques or
open boats  one of six and the other of seven oars  two horses were at
the same time to be led along the banks of the river for the purpose of
bringing home game  or hunting in case of scarcity 

of the proceedings of this expedition  the following is a succinct and
circumstantial narrative 

all the preparations being completed  we left our encampment on monday 
may 14th  1804  this spot is at the mouth of wood river  a small stream
which empties itself into the mississippi  opposite to the entrance of
the missouri  it is situated in latitude 38 degrees 55  19 6 10  north 
and longitude from greenwich  89 degrees 57  45   on both sides of the
mississippi the land for two or three miles is rich and level  but
gradually swells into a high pleasant country  with less timber on the
western than on the eastern side  but all susceptible of cultivation 
the point which separates the two rivers on the north  extends for
fifteen or twenty miles  the greater part of which is an open level
plain  in which the people of the neighbourhood cultivate what little
grain they raise  not being able to set sail before four o clock p m  
we did not make more than four miles  and encamped on the first island
opposite a small creek called cold water 

may 15  the rain  which had continued yesterday and last night  ceased
this morning  we then proceeded  and after passing two small islands
about ten miles further  stopped for the night at piper s landing 
opposite another island  the water is here very rapid and the banks
falling in  we found that our boat was too heavily laden in the stern 
in consequence of which she ran on logs three times to day  it became
necessary to throw the greatest weight on the bow of the boat  a
precaution very necessary in ascending both the missouri and
mississippi rivers  in the beds of which  there lie great quantities of
concealed timber 

the next morning we set sail at five o clock  at the distance of a few
miles  we passed a remarkable large coal hill on the north side  called
by the french la charbonniere  and arrived at the town of st  charles 
here we remained a few days 

st  charles is a small town on the north bank of the missouri  about
twenty one miles from its confluence with the mississippi  it is
situated in a narrow plain  sufficiently high to protect it from the
annual risings of the river in the month of june  and at the foot of a
range of small hills  which have occasioned its being called petite
cote  a name by which it is more known to the french than by that of st 
charles  one principal street  about a mile in length and running
parallel with the river  divides the town  which is composed of nearly
one hundred small wooden houses  besides a chapel  the inhabitants 
about four hundred and fifty in number  are chiefly descendants from the
french of canada  and  in their manners  they unite all the careless
gayety  and the amiable hospitality of the best times of france  yet 
like most of their countrymen in america  they are but ill qualified for
the rude life of a frontier  not that they are without talent  for they
possess much natural genius and vivacity  nor that they are destitute of
enterprize  for their hunting excursions are long  laborious  and
hazardous  but their exertions are all desultory  their industry is
without system  and without perseverance  the surrounding country 
therefore  though rich  is not  in general  well cultivated  the
inhabitants chiefly subsisting by hunting and trade with the indians 
and confine their culture to gardening  in which they excel 

being joined by captain lewis  who had been detained by business at st 
louis  we again set sail on monday  may 21st  in the afternoon  but were
prevented by wind and rain from going more than about three miles  when
we encamped on the upper point of an island  nearly opposite a creek
which falls in on the south side 

on the 22d we made about eighteen miles  passing several small farms on
the bank of the river  a number of islands  and a large creek on the
south side  called bonhomme  or goodman s river  a small number of
emigrants from the united states have settled on the sides of this
creek  which are very fertile  we also passed some high lands  and
encamped  on the north side  near a small creek  here we met with a camp
of kickapoo indians who had left us at st  charles  with a promise of
procuring us some provisions by the time we overtook them  they now made
us a present of four deer  and we gave them in return two quarts of
whiskey  this tribe reside on the heads of the kaskaskia and illinois
river  on the other side of the mississippi  but occasionally hunt on
the missouri 

may 23  two miles from our camp of last night  we reached a river
emptying itself on the north side  called osage woman river  it is about
thirty yards wide  and has now a settlement of thirty or forty families
from the united states  about a mile and a half beyond this is a large
cave  on the south side at the foot of cliffs nearby three hundred feet
high  overhanging the water  which becomes very swift at this place  the
cave is one hundred and twenty feet wide  forty feet deep  and twenty
high  it is known by the name of the tavern  among the traders who have
written their names on the rock  and painted some images which command
the homage of the indians and french  about a little further we passed a
small creek called tavern creek  and encamped on the south side of the
river  having gone nine miles 

early the next morning we ascended a very difficult rapid  called the
devil s race ground  where the current sets for half a mile against some
projecting rocks on the south side  we were less fortunate in attempting
a second place of equal difficulty  passing near the southern shore  the
bank fell in so fast as to oblige us to cross the river instantly 
between the northern side and a sandbar which is constantly moving and
banking with the violence of the current  the boat struck on it  and
would have upset immediately  if the men had not jumped into the water
and held her  till the sand washed from under her  we encamped on the
south side  having ascended ten miles  and the next day  may 25  passed
on the south side the mouth of wood river  on the north  two small
creeks and several islands  and stopped for the night at the entrance of
a creek on the north side  called by the french la charrette  ten miles
from our last encampment  and a little above a small village of the same
name  it consists of seven small houses  and as many poor families who
have fixed themselves here for the convenience of trade  and form the
last establishment of whites on the missouri  it rained last night  yet
we found this morning that the river had fallen several inches 

may 26  the wind being favourable we made eighteen miles to day  we
passed in the morning several islands  the largest of which is buffaloe
island  separated from the southern side by a small channel which
receives the waters of buffaloe creek  on the same side is shepherd s
creek  a little beyond which we encamped on the northern side  the next
day we sailed along a large island called otter island  on the northern
side  extending nearly ten miles in length  narrow but high in its
situation  and one of the most fertile in the whole river  between it
and the northern shore  three small creeks  one of which has the same
name with the island  empty themselves  on the southern shore is a creek
twenty yards wide  called ash creek  in the course of the day we met two
canoes loaded with furs  which had been two months on their route  from
the mahar nation  residing more than seven hundred miles up the
river  one large raft from the pawnees on the river platte  and three
others from the grand osage river  at the distance of fifteen miles we
encamped on a willow island  at the entrance of the river gasconade 
this river falls into the missouri from the south  one hundred miles
from the mississippi  its length is about one hundred and fifty miles in
a course generally northeast through a hilly country  on its banks are a
number of saltpetre caves  and it is believed some mines of lead in the
vicinity  its width at the mouth is one hundred and fifty seven yards 
and its depth nineteen feet 

here we halted for the purpose of hunting and drying our provisions  and
making the necessary celestial observations  this being completed  we
set sail on the 29th at four o clock  and at four miles distance
encamped on the south side  above a small creek  called deer creek  the
next day  30th  we set out early  and at two miles distant reached a
large cave  on the north  called montbrun s tavern  after a french
trader of that name  just above a creek called after the same person 
beyond this is a large island  and at the distance of four miles  rush
creek coming in from the south  at eleven  big muddy river on the north 
about fifty yards wide  three miles further  is little muddy river on
the same side  opposite to which we encamped at the mouth of grindstone
creek  the rain which began last night continued through the day 
accompanied with high wind and some hail  the river has been rising fast
for two days  and the country around appears full of water  along the
sides of the river to day we observe much timber  the cotton wood  the
sycamore  hickory  white walnut  some grapevines  and rushes  the high
west wind and rain compelled us to remain all the next day  may 31  in
the afternoon a boat came down from the grand osage river  bringing a
letter from a person sent to the osage nation on the arkansaw river 
which mentioned that the letter announcing the cession of louisiana was
committed to the flames  that the indians would not believe that the
americans were owners of that country  and disregarded st  louis and its
supplies  the party was occupied in hunting  in the course of which 
they caught in the woods several very large rats  we set sail early the
next morning  june 1st  and at six miles distant passed bear creek  a
stream of about twenty five yards width  but the wind being ahead and
the current rapid  we were unable to make more than thirteen miles to
the mouth of the osage river  where we encamped and remained the
following day  for the purpose of making celestial observations  the
osage river empties itself into the missouri  at one hundred and
thirty three miles distance from the mouth of the latter river  its
general course is west and west southwest through a rich and level
country  at the junction the missouri is about eight hundred and
seventy five yards wide  and the osage three hundred and ninety seven 
the low point of junction is in latitude 38 degrees 31  16   and at a
short distance from it is a high commanding position  whence we enjoyed
a delightful prospect of the country 

the osage river gives or owes its name to a nation inhabiting its banks
at a considerable distance from this place  their present name however 
seems to have originated from the french traders  for both among
themselves and their neighbours they are called the wasbashas  they
number between twelve and thirteen hundred warriors  and consist of
three tribes  the great osages of about five hundred warriors  living in
a village on the south bank of the river  the little osages  of nearly
half that number  residing at the distance of six miles from them  and
the arkansaw band  a colony of osages  of six hundred warriors  who left
them some years ago  under the command of a chief called the bigfoot 
and settled on the vermillion river  a branch of the arkansaw  in person
the osages are among the largest and best formed indians  and are said
to possess fine military capacities  but residing as they do in
villages  and having made considerable advance in agriculture  they seem
less addicted to war  than their northern neighbours  to whom the use of
rifles gives a great superiority  among the peculiarities of this
people  there is nothing more remarkable than the tradition relative to
their origin  according to universal belief  the founder of the nation
was a snail passing a quiet existence along the banks of the osage  till
a high flood swept him down to the missouri  and left him exposed on the
shore  the heat of the sun at length ripened him into a man  but with
the change of his nature  he had not forgotten his native seats on the
osage  towards which  he immediately bent his way  he was however soon
overtaken by hunger  and fatigue  when happily the great spirit
appeared  and giving him a bow and arrow  showed him how to kill and
cook deer  and cover himself with the skin  he then proceeded to his
original residence  but as he approached the river  he was met by a
beaver  who inquired haughtily who he was  and by what authority he came
to disturb his possession  the osage answered that the river was his
own  for he had once lived on its borders  as they stood disputing  the
daughter of the beaver came  and having by her entreaties reconciled her
father to this young stranger  it was proposed that the osage should
marry the young beaver  and share with her family the enjoyment of the
river  the osage readily consented  and from this happy union there soon
came the village and the nation of the wasbasha  or osages  who have
ever since preserved a pious reverence for their ancestors  abstaining
from the chace of the beaver  because in killing that animal  they
killed a brother of the osage  of late years  however  since the trade
with the whites has rendered beaver skins more valuable  the sanctity of
these maternal relatives has visibly reduced  and the poor animals have
nearly lost all the privileges of kindred 

on the afternoon of june 3  we proceeded  and at three miles distant 
reached a creek called cupboard creek  from a rock of that appearance
near its entrance  two miles further we encamped at moreau creek  a
stream of twenty yards width  on the southern side  the next morning  we
passed at an early hour  cedar island on the north  so called from the
abundance of the tree of that name  near which is a small creek  named
nightingale creek  from a bird of that species  who sang for us during
the night  beyond cedar island  are some others of a smaller extent  and
at seven miles distance a creek fifteen or twenty yards wide  entering
from the north  and known by the name of cedar creek  at seven and a
half miles further  we passed on the south side another creek  which we
called mast creek  from the circumstance of our mast being broken by
running under a concealed tree  a little above is another creek on the
left  one mile beyond which we encamped on the southern shore under high
projecting cliffs  the french had reported that lead ore was to be found
in this place  but on examining the hills  we could discern no
appearance of that mineral  along the river on the south  is a low land
covered with rushes  and high nettles  and near the mouths of the
creeks  supplied with oak  ash  and walnut timber  on the north the land
is rich and well situated  we made seventeen and a half miles this day 
the river is falling slowly  we continued our route the next morning
early  a small creek called lead creek  on the south  another on the
north  known to the french by the name of little good woman s creek  and
again big rock creek on the south were the only streams we passed this
morning  at eleven o clock we met a raft made of two canoes joined
together  in which two french traders were descending  from eighty
leagues up the river kanzas  where they had wintered  and caught great
quantities of beaver  but had lost much of their game by fires from the
prairies  they told us that the kanzas nation is now hunting buffaloe in
the plains  having passed the last winter in this river  two miles
further  we reached on the south little manitou creek  which takes its
name from a strange figure resembling the bust of a man  with the horns
of a stag  painted on a projecting rock  which may represent some spirit
or deity  near this is a sandbar extending several miles  which renders
the navigation difficult  and a small creek called sand creek on the
south  where we stopped for dinner  and gathered wild cresses and tongue
grass from the sandbar  the rapidity of the currents added to our having
broken our mast  prevented our going more than twelve and a half miles 
the scouts and hunters whom we always kept out  report that they have
seen fresh tracks of indians  the next morning we left our camp  which
was on the south side  opposite to a large island in the middle of the
river  and at five miles reached a creek on the north side  of about
twenty yards wide  called split rock creek  from a fissure in the point
of a neighbouring rock  three miles beyond this  on the south is saline
river  it is about thirty yards wide  and has its name from the number
of salt licks  and springs  which render its water brackish  the river
is very rapid and the banks falling in  after leaving saline creek  we
passed one large island and several smaller ones  having made fourteen
miles  the water rose a foot during the last night 

the next day  june 7  we passed at four and a half miles big manitou
creek  near which is a limestone rock inlaid with flint of various
colours  and embellished  or at least covered with uncouth paintings of
animals and inscriptions  we landed to examine it  but found the place
occupied by a nest of rattlesnakes  of which we killed three  we also
examined some licks and springs of salt water  two or three miles up
this creek  we then proceeded by some small willow islands  and encamped
at the mouth of good woman river on the north  it is about thirty five
yards wide  and said to be navigable for boats several leagues  the
hunters  who had hitherto given us only deer  brought in this evening
three bears  and had seen some indication of buffaloe  we had come
fourteen miles 

june 8  we saw several small willow islands  and a creek on the south 
near which are a number of deerlicks  at nine miles distance we came to
mine river  this river  which falls into the missouri from the south 
is said to be navigable for boats eighty or ninety miles  and is about
seventy yards wide at its mouth  it forks about five or six leagues from
the missouri  and at the point of junction are some very rich salt
springs  the west branch in particular  is so much impregnated  that 
for twenty miles  the water is not palatable  several branches of the
manitou and good woman are equally tinctured  the french report also 
that lead ore has been found on different parts of the river  we made
several excursions near the river through the low rich country on its
banks  and after dinner went on to the island of mills  where we
encamped  we met with a party of three hunters from the sioux river 
they had been out for twelve months  and collected about nine hundred
dollars worth of peltries and furs  we ascended this river twelve miles 

on the 9th  we set out early  and reached a cliff of rocks  called the
arrow rock  near to which is a prairie called the prairies of arrows 
and arrow creek  a small stream about eight yards wide  whose source is
in the adjoining prairies on the south  at this cliff the missouri is
confined within a bed of two hundred yards  and about four miles to the
south east is a large lick and salt spring of great strength  about
three miles further is blackbird creek on the north side  opposite to
which  is an island and a prairie inclosing a small lake  five miles
beyond this we encamped on the south side  after making  in the course
of the day  thirteen miles  the land on the north is a high rich plain 
on the south it is also even  of a good quality  and rising from fifty
to one hundred feet 

the next morning  10th  we passed deer creek  and at the distance of
five miles  the two rivers called by the french the two charatons  a
corruption of thieraton  the first of which is thirty  the second
seventy yards wide  and enter the missouri together  they are both
navigable for boats  the country through which they pass is broken 
rich  and thickly covered with timber  the ayauway nation  consisting
of three hundred men  have a village near its head waters on the river
de moines  farther on we passed a large island called  chicot  or stump
island  and encamped on the south  after making ten miles  a head wind
forced us to remain there all the next day  during which we dried the
meat we had killed  and examined the surrounding country  which consists
of good land  well watered  and supplied with timber  the prairies also
differ from those eastward of the mississippi  inasmuch as the latter
are generally without any covering except grass  whilst the former
abound with hazel  grapes and other fruits  among which is the osage
plum of a superior size and quality  on the morning of the 12th  we
passed through difficult places in the river  and reached plum creek on
the south side  at one o clock  we met two rafts loaded  the one with
furs  the other with the tallow of buffaloe  they were from the sioux
nation  and on their way to st  louis  but we were fortunate enough to
engage one of them  a mr  durion  who had lived with that nation more
than twenty years  and was high in their confidence  to accompany us
thither  we made nine miles  on the 13th  we passed at between four and
five miles  a bend of the river  and two creeks on the north  called the
round bend creeks  between these two creeks is the prairie  in which
once stood the ancient village of the missouris  of this village there
remains no vestige  nor is there any thing to recall this great and
numerous nation  except a feeble remnant of about thirty families  they
were driven from their original seats by the invasions of the sauks and
other indians from the mississippi  who destroyed at this village two
hundred of them in one contest  and sought refuge near the little osage 
on the other side of the river  the encroachment of the same enemies
forced  about thirty years since  both these nations from the banks of
the missouri  a few retired with the osage  and the remainder found an
asylum on the river platte  among the ottoes  who are themselves
declining  opposite the plain there was an island and a french fort 
but there is now no appearance of either  the successive inundations
having probably washed them away  as the willow island which is in the
situation described by du pratz  is small and of recent formation  five
miles from this place is the mouth of grand river  where we encamped 
this river follows a course nearly south  or south east  and is between
eighty and a hundred yards wide where it enters the missouri  near a
delightful and rich plain  a racoon  a bear  and some deer were obtained
to day  we proceeded at six o clock the next morning  the current was so
rapid and the banks on the north falling in so constantly  that we were
obliged to approach the sandbars on the south  these were moving
continually  and formed the worst passage we had seen  and which we
surmounted with much difficulty  we met a trading raft from the pawnee
nation on the river platte  and attempted unsuccessfully to engage one
of their party to return with us  at the distance of eight miles  we
came to some high cliffs  called the snake bluffs  from the number of
that animal in the neighbourhood  and immediately above these bluffs 
snake creek  about eighteen yards wide  on which we encamped  one of our
hunters  a half indian  brought us an account of his having to day
passed a small lake  near which a number of deer were feeding  and in
the pond he heard a snake making a guttural noise like a turkey  he
fired his gun  but the noise became louder  he adds  that he has heard
the indians mention this species of snake  and this story is confirmed
by a frenchman of our party  all the next day  the river being very
high  the sandbars were so rolling and numerous  and the current so
strong  that we were unable to stem it even with oars added to our
sails  this obliged us to go nearer the banks  which were falling in  so
that we could not make  though the boat was occasionally towed  more
than fourteen miles  we passed several islands and one creek on the
south side  and encamped on the north opposite a beautiful plain  which
extends as far back as the osage river  and some miles up the missouri 
in front of our encampment are the remains of an old village of the
little osage  situated at some distance from the river  and at the foot
of a small hill  about three miles above them  in view of our camp is
the situation of the old village of the missouris after they fled from
the sauks  the inroads of the same tribe compelled the little osage to
retire from the missouri a few years ago  and establish themselves near
the great osages  the river  which is here about one mile wide  had
risen in the morning  but fell towards evening  early this morning  june
16th  we joined the camp of our hunters  who had provided two deer and
two bear  and then passing an island and a prairie on the north covered
with a species of timothy  made our way through bad sandbars and a swift
current  to an encampment for the evening  on the north side  at ten
miles distance  the timber which we examined to day was not sufficiently
strong for oars  the musquitoes and ticks are exceedingly troublesome 
on the 17th  we set out early and having come to a convenient place at
one mile distance  for procuring timber and making oars  we occupied
ourselves in that way on this and the following day  the country on the
north of the river is rich and covered with timber  among which we
procured the ash for oars  at two miles it changes into extensive
prairies  and at seven or eight miles distance becomes higher and
waving  the prairie and high lands on the south commence more
immediately on the river  the whole is well watered and provided with
game  such as deer  elk  and bear  the hunters brought in a fat horse
which was probably lost by some war party  this being the crossing place
for the sauks  ayauways  and sioux  in their excursions against the
osage 

june 19  the oars being finished  we proceeded under a gentle breeze by
two large and some smaller islands  the sandbars are numerous and so
bad  that at one place we were forced to clear away the driftwood in
order to pass  the water too was so rapid that we were under the
necessity of towing the boat for half a mile round a point of rocks on
the south side  we passed two creeks  one called tiger creek on the
north  twenty five yards wide at the extremity of a large island called
panther island  the other tabo creek on the south  fifteen yards wide 
along the shores are gooseberries and raspberries in great abundance  at
the distance of seventeen and a half miles we encamped on the south 
near a lake about two miles from the river and several in circumference 
and much frequented by deer and all kinds of fowls  on the north the
land is higher and better calculated for farms than that on the south 
which ascends more gradually  but is still rich and pleasant  the
musquitoes and other animals are so troublesome that musquitoe biers or
nets were distributed to the party  the next morning we passed a large
island  opposite to which on the north is a large and beautiful prairie 
called sauk prairie  the land being fine and well timbered on both sides
the river  pelicans were seen to day  we made six and three quarter
miles  and encamped at the lower point of a small island  along the
north side of which we proceeded the next day  june 21st  but not
without danger in consequence of the sands and the rapidity of the water
which rose three inches last night  behind another island come in from
the south two creeks  called eau  beau  or clear water creeks  on the
north is a very remarkable bend  where the high lands approach the
river  and form an acute angle at the head of a large island produced by
a narrow channel through the point of the bend  we passed several other
islands  and encamped at seven and a half miles on the south 

22d  the river rose during the night four inches  the water is very
rapid and crowded with concealed timber  we passed two large islands and
an extensive prairie on the south  beginning with a rich low land  and
rising to the distance of seventy or eighty feet of rolling clear
country  the thermometer at three o clock p m  was at 87 degrees  after
coming ten and a half miles we encamped on the south  opposite a large
creek called fire prairie river 

23d  the wind was against us this morning  and became so violent that we
made only three and a half miles  and were obliged to lie to during the
day at a small island  this is separated from the northern side by a
narrow channel which cannot be passed by boats  being choaked by trees
and drifted wood  directly opposite on the south  is a high commanding
position  more than seventy feet above high water mark  and overlooking
the river which is here of but little width  this spot has many
advantages for a fort  and trading house with the indians  a  the river
fell eight inches last night 

 footnote a  the united states built in september  1808  a factory and
fort at this spot  which is very convenient for trading with the osages 
ayauways and kanzas  

the next day  24th  we passed at eight miles distance  hay cabin creek
coming in from the south  about twenty yards wide  and so called from
camps of straw built on it  to the north are some rocks projecting into
the river  and a little beyond them a creek on the same side  called
charaton scarty  that is  charaton like the otter  we halted  after
making eleven and a half miles  the country on both sides being fine and
interspersed with prairies  in which we now see numerous herds of deer 
pasturing in the plains or feeding on the young willows of the river 

25th  a thick fog detained us till eight o clock  when we set sail  and
at three miles reached a bank of stone coal on the north  which appeared
to be very abundant  just below it is a creek called after the bank la
charbonniere  four miles further  and on the southern side  comes in a
small creek  called la benite  the prairies here approach the river and
contain many fruits  such as plums  raspberries  wild apples  and nearer
the river vast quantities of mulberries  our encampment was at thirteen
miles distance on an island to the north  opposite some hills higher
than usual  and almost one hundred and sixty or one hundred and eighty
feet  26th  at one mile we passed at the end of a small island  blue
water creek  which is about thirty yards wide at its entrance from the
south  a  here the missouri is confined within a narrow bed  and the
current still more so by counter currents or whirls on one side and a
high bank on the other  we passed a small island and a sandbar  where
our tow rope broke twice  and we rowed round with great exertions  we
saw a number of parroquets  and killed some deer  after nine and three
quarter miles we encamped at the upper point of the mouth of the river
kanzas  here we remained two days  during which we made the necessary
observations  recruited the party  and repaired the boat  the river
kanzas takes its rise in the plains between the arkansaw and platte
rivers  and pursues a course generally east till its junction with the
missouri which is in latitude 38 degrees 31  13   here it is three
hundred and forty and a quarter yards wide  though it is wider a short
distance above the mouth  the missouri itself is about five hundred
yards in width  the point of union is low and subject to inundations for
two hundred and fifty yards  it then rises a little above high water
mark  and continues so as far back as the hills  on the south of the
kanzas the hills or highlands come within one mile and a half of the
river  on the north of the missouri they do not approach nearer than
several miles  but on all sides the country is fine  the comparative
specific gravities of the two rivers is  for the missouri seventy eight 
the kanzas seventy two degrees  the waters of the latter have a very
disagreeable taste  the former has risen during yesterday and to day
about two feet  on the banks of the kanzas reside the indians of the
same name  consisting of two villages  one at about twenty  the other
forty leagues from its mouth  and amounting to about three hundred men 
they once lived twenty four leagues higher than the kanzas  on the south
bank of the missouri  and were then more numerous  but they have been
reduced and banished by the sauks and ayauways  who being better
supplied with arms have an advantage over the kanzas  though the latter
are not less fierce or warlike than themselves  this nation is now
hunting in the plains for the buffaloe which our hunters have seen for
the first time 

 footnote a  a few miles up the blue water creek are quarries of plaster
of paris  since worked and brought down to st  louis  

on the 29th  we set out late in the afternoon  and having passed a
sandbar  near which the boat was almost lost  and a large island on the
north  we encamped at seven and a quarter miles on the same side in the
low lands  where the rushes are so thick that it is troublesome to walk
through them  early the next morning  30th  we reached  at five miles
distance  the mouth of a river coming in from the north  and called by
the french  petite riviere platte  or little shallow river  it is about
sixty yards wide at its mouth  a few of the party who ascended informed
us  that the lands on both sides are good  and that there are several
falls well calculated for mills  the wind was from the south west  and
the weather oppressively warm  the thermometer standing at 96 degrees
above at three o clock p m  one mile beyond this is a small creek on the
south  at five miles from which we encamped on the same side  opposite
the lower point of an island called diamond island  the land on the
north between the little shallow river  and the missouri is not good and
subject to overflow  on the south it is higher and better timbered 

july 1st  we proceeded along the north side of diamond island  where a
small creek called biscuit creek empties itself  one and a half miles
above the island is a large sandbar in the middle of the river  beyond
which we stopped to refresh the men  who suffered very much from the
heat  here we observed great quantities of grapes and raspberries 
between one and two miles farther are three islands a creek on the
south known by the french name of remore  the main current which is now
on the south side of the largest of the three islands  ran three years 
as we were told on the north  and there was then no appearance of the
two smaller islands  at the distance of four and a half miles we reached
the lower point of a cluster of small islands  two large and two small 
called isles des pares or field islands  paccaun trees were this day
seen  and large quantities of deer and turkies on the banks  we had
advanced twelve miles 

july 2d  we left our encampment  opposite to which is a high and
beautiful prairie on the southern side  and passed up the south of the
islands  which are high meadows  and a creek on the north called pare
creek  here for half an hour the river became covered with drift wood 
which rendered the navigation dangerous  and was probably caused by the
giving way of some sandbar  which had detained the wood  after making
five miles we passed a stream on the south called turky creek  near a
sandbar  where we could scarcely stem the current with twenty oars  and
all the poles we had  on the north at about two miles further is a large
island called by the indians  wau car da war card da  or the bear
medicine island  here we landed and replaced our mast  which had been
broken three days ago  by running against a tree  overhanging the river 
thence we proceeded  and after night stopped on the north side  above
the island  having come eleven and a half miles  opposite our camp is a
valley  in which was situated an old village of the kanzas  between two
high points of land  and on the bank of the river  about a mile in the
rear of the village was a small fort  built by the french on an
elevation  there are now no traces of the village  but the situation of
the fort may be recognized by some remains of chimnies  and the general
outline of the fortification  as well as by the fine spring which
supplied it with water  the party  who were stationed here  were
probably cut off by the indians  as there are no accounts of them 

july 3d  a gentle breeze from the south carried us eleven and a quarter
miles this day  past two islands  one a small willow island  the other
large  and called by the french isle des vaches  or cow island  at the
head of this island  on the northern shore  is a large pond containing
beaver  and fowls of different kinds  after passing a bad sandbar  we
stopped on the south side at an old trading house  which is now
deserted  and half a mile beyond it encamped on the south  the land is
fine along the rivers  and some distance back  we observed the black
walnut and oak  among the timber  and the honey suckle and the
buck s eye  with the nuts on them 

the morning of the 4th july was announced by the discharge of our gun 
at one mile we reached the mouth of a bayeau or creek  coming from a
large lake on the north side  which appears as if it had once been the
bed of the river  to which it runs parallel for several miles  the water
of it is clear and supplied by a small creek and several springs  and
the number of goslins which we saw on it  induced us to call it the
gosling lake  it is about three quarters of a mile wide  and seven or
eight miles long  one of our men was bitten by a snake  but a poultice
of bark and gunpowder was sufficient to cure the wound  at ten and a
quarter miles we reached a creek on the south about twelve yards wide
and coming from an extensive prairie  which approached the borders of
the river  to this creek which had no name  we gave that of fourth of
july creek  above it is a high mound  where three indian paths centre 
and from which is a very extensive prospect  after fifteen miles sail we
came to on the north a little above a creek on the southern side  about
thirty yards wide  which we called independence creek  in honour of the
day  which we could celebrate only by an evening gun  and an additional
gill of whiskey to the men 

the next day  5th  we crossed over to the south and came along the bank
of an extensive and beautiful prairie  interspersed with copses of
timber  and watered by independence creek  on this bank formerly stood
the second village of the kanzas  from the remains it must have been
once a large town  we passed several bad sandbars  and a small creek to
the south  which we called yellow ochre creek  from a bank of that
mineral a little above it  the river continues to fall  on the shores
are great quantities of summer and fall grapes  berries and wild roses 
deer is not so abundant as usual  but there are numerous tracks of elk
around us  we encamped at ten miles distance on the south side under a
high bank  opposite to which was a low land covered with tall rushes 
and some timber 

july 6  we set sail  and at one mile passed a sandbar  three miles
further an island  a prairie to the north  at the distance of four miles
called reevey s prairie  after a man who was killed there  at which
place the river is confined to a very narrow channel  and by a sandbar
from the south  four miles beyond is another sandbar terminated by a
small willow island  and forming a very considerable bend in the river
towards the north  the sand of the bar is light  intermixed with small
pebbles and some pit coal  the river falls slowly  and  owing either to
the muddiness of its water  or the extreme heat of the weather  the men
perspire profusely  we encamped on the south having made twelve miles 
the bird called whip poor will sat on the boat for some time 

in the morning  july 7th  the rapidity of the water obliged us to draw
the boat along with ropes  at six and three quarter miles  we came to a
sandbar  at a point opposite a fine rich prairie on the north  called
st  michael s  the prairies of this neighbourhood have the appearance of
distinct farms  divided by narrow strips of woodland  which follow the
borders of the small runs leading to the river  above this  about a
mile  is a cliff of yellow clay on the north  at four o clock we passed
a narrow part of the channel  where the water is confined within a bed
of two hundred yards wide  the current running directly against the
southern bank with no sand on the north to confine it or break its
force  we made fourteen miles  and halted on the north  after which we
had a violent gust about seven o clock  one of the hunters saw in a pond
to the north which we passed yesterday a number of young swans  we saw a
large rat  and killed a wolf  another of our men had a stroke of the
sun  he was bled  and took a preparation of nitre which relieved him
considerably 

july 8  we set out early  and soon passed a small creek on the north 
which we called ordway s creek  from our sergeant of that name who had
been sent on shore with the horses  and went up it  on the same side are
three small islands  one of which is the little nodawa  and a large
island called the great nodawa  extending more than five miles  and
containing seven or eight thousand acres of high good land  rarely
overflowed  and one of the largest islands of the missouri  it is
separated from the northern shore by a small channel of from forty five
to eighty yards wide  up which we passed  and found near the western
extremity of the island the mouth of the river nodawa  this river
persues nearly a southern course  is navigable for boats to some
distance  and about seventy yards wide above the mouth  though not so
wide immediately there  as the mud from the missouri contracts its
channel  at twelve and a quarter miles  we encamped on the north side 
near the head of nodawa island  and opposite a smaller one in the middle
of the river  five of the men were this day sick with violent headache 
the river continues to fall 

july 9th  we passed the island opposite to which we last night encamped 
and saw near the head of it a creek falling in from a pond on the north 
to which we gave the name of pike pond  from the numbers of that animal
which some of our party saw from the shore  the wind changed at eight
from n e  to s w  and brought rain  at six miles we passed the mouth of
monter s creek on the south  and two miles above a few cabins  where one
of our party had encamped with some frenchmen about two years ago 
further on we passed an island on the north  opposite some cliffs on the
south side  near which loup or wolf river falls into the missouri  this
river is about sixty yards wide  it heads near the same sources as the
kanzas  and is navigable for boats  at some distance up  at fourteen
miles we encamped on the south side 

tuesday 10th  we proceeded on by a prairie on the upper side of wolf
river  and at four miles passed a creek fifteen yards wide on the south 
called pape s creek after a spaniard of that name  who killed himself
there  at six miles we dined on an island called by the french isle de
salomon  or solomon s island  opposite to which on the south is a
beautiful plain covered with grass  intermixed with wild rye and a kind
of wild potatoe  after making ten miles we stopped for the night on the
northern side  opposite a cliff of yellow clay  the river has neither
risen nor fallen to day  on the north the low land is very extensive 
and covered with vines  on the south  the hills approach nearer the
river  and back of them commence the plains  there are a great many
goslins along the banks 

wednesday 11th  after three miles sailing we came to a willow island on
the north side  behind which enters a creek called by the indians
tarkio  above this creek on the north the low lands are subject to
overflow  and further back the undergrowth of vines particularly  is so
abundant that they can scarcely be passed  three miles from the tarkio
we encamped on a large sand island on the north  immediately opposite
the river nemahaw 

thursday 12th  we remained here to day for the purpose of refreshing the
party  and making lunar observations  the nemahaw empties itself into
the missouri from the south  and is eighty yards wide at the confluence 
which is in lat  39 degrees 55  56   capt  clarke ascended it in the
perioque about two miles to the mouth of a small creek on the lower
side  on going ashore he found in the level plain several artificial
mounds or graves  and on the adjoining hills others of a larger size 
this appearance indicates sufficiently the former population of this
country  the mounds being certainly intended as tombs  the indians of
the missouri still preserving the custom of interring the dead on high
ground  from the top of the highest mound a delightful prospect
presented itself  the level and extensive meadows watered by the
nemahaw  and enlivened by the few trees and shrubs skirting the borders
of the river and its tributary streams  the lowland of the missouri
covered with undulating grass  nearly five feet high  gradually rising
into a second plain  where rich weeds and flowers are interspersed with
copses of the osage plum  further back are seen small groves of trees 
an abundance of grapes  the wild cherry of the missouri  resembling our
own  but larger  and growing on a small bush  and the chokecherry  which
we observed for the first time  some of the grapes gathered to day are
nearly ripe  on the south of the nemahaw  and about a quarter of a mile
from its mouth  is a cliff of freestone  in which are various
inscriptions and marks made by the indians  the sand island where we are
encamped  is covered with the two species of willow  broad and narrow
leaf 

july 13th  we proceeded at sunrise with a fair wind from the south  and
at two miles  passed the mouth of a small river on the north  called big
tarkio  a channel from the bed of the missouri once ran into this river 
and formed an island called st  joseph s  but the channel is now filled
up  and the island is added to the northern shore  further on to the
south  is situated an extensive plain  covered with a grass resembling
timothy in its general appearance  except the seed which is like
flaxseed  and also a number of grapevines  at twelve miles  we passed an
island on the north  above which is a large sandbar covered with
willows  and at twenty and a half miles  stopped on a large sandbar  in
the middle of the river opposite a high handsome prairie  which extends
to the hills four or five miles distant  though near the bank the land
is low  and subject to be overflowed  this day was exceedingly fine and
pleasant  a storm of wind and rain from north northeast  last night 
having cooled the air 

july 14  we had some hard showers of rain before seven o clock  when we
set out  we had just reached the end of the sand island  and seen the
opposite banks falling in  and so lined with timber that we could not
approach it without danger  when a sudden squall  from the northeast 
struck the boat on the starboard quarter  and would have certainly
dashed her to pieces on the sand island  if the party had not leaped
into the river  and with the aid of the anchor and cable kept her off 
the waves dashing over her for the space of forty minutes  after which 
the river became almost instantaneously calm and smooth  the two
periogues were ahead  in a situation nearly similar  but fortunately no
damage was done to the boats or the loading  the wind having shifted to
the southeast  we came at the distance of two miles  to an inland on the
north  where we dined  one mile above  on the same side of the river  is
a small factory  where a merchant of st  louis traded with the ottoes
and pawnees two years ago  near this is an extensive lowland  part of
which is overflowed occasionally  the rest is rich and well timbered 
the wind again changed to northwest by north  at seven and a half miles 
we reached lower point of a large island  on the north side  a small
distance above this point  is a river  called by the maha indians 
nishnahbatona  this is a considerable creek  nearly as large as the mine
river  and runs parallel to the missouri the greater part of its course 
being fifty yards wide at the mouth  in the prairies or glades  we saw
wild timothy  lambsquarter  cuckleberries  and on the edges of the
river  summer grapes  plums  and gooseberries  we also saw to day  for
the first time  some elk  at which some of the party shot  but at too
great a distance  we encamped on the north side of the island  a little
above nishnahbatona  having made nine miles  the river fell a little 

july 15  a thick fog prevented our leaving the encampment before seven 
at about four miles  we reached the extremity of the large island  and
crossing to the south  at the distance of seven miles  arrived at the
little nemaha  a small river from the south  forty yards wide a little
above its mouth  but contracting  as do almost all the waters emptying
into the missouri  at its confluence  at nine and three quarter miles 
we encamped on a woody point  on the south  along the southern bank  is
a rich lowland covered with peavine  and rich weeds  and watered by
small streams rising in the adjoining prairies  they too  are rich  and
though with abundance of grass  have no timber except what grows near
the water  interspersed through both are grapevines  plums of two kinds 
two species of wild cherries  hazlenuts  and gooseberries  on the south
there is one unbroken plain  on the north the river is skirted with some
timber  behind which the plain extends four or five miles to the hills 
which seem to have little wood 

july 16  we continued our route between a large island opposite to our
last night s encampment  and an extensive prairie on the south  about
six miles  we came to another large island  called fairsun island  on
the same side  above which is a spot  where about twenty acres of the
hill have fallen into the river  near this  is a cliff of sandstone for
two miles  which is much frequented by birds  at this place the river is
about one mile wide  but not deep  as the timber  or sawyers  may be
seen  scattered across the whole of its bottom  at twenty miles
distance  we saw on the south  an island called by the french  l isle
chance  or bald island  opposite to a large prairie  which we called
baldpated prairie  from a ridge of naked hills which bound it  running
parallel with the river as far as we could see  and from three to six
miles distance  to the south the hills touch the river  we encamped a
quarter of a mile beyond this  in a point of woods on the north side 
the river continues to fall 

tuesday  july 17  we remained here this day  in order to make
observations and correct the chronometer  which ran down on sunday  the
latitude we found to be 40 degrees 27  5 4 10  the observation of the
time proved our chronometer too slow  by 6  51 6 10  the highlands bear
from our camp  north 25 degrees west  up the river  captain lewis rode
up the country  and saw the nishnahbatona  about ten or twelve miles
from its mouth  at a place not more than three hundred yards from the
missouri  and a little above our camp  it then passes near the foot of
the baldhills  and is at least six feet below the level of the missouri 
on its banks are the oak  walnut  and mulberry  the common current of
the missouri  taken with the log  is 50 fathoms in 40   at some places 
and even 20  

wednesday  july 18  the morning was fair  and a gentle wind from
southeast by south  carried us along between the prairie on the north 
and bald island to the south  opposite the middle of which  the
nishnahbatona approaches the nearest to the missouri  the current here
ran fifty fathoms in 41   at thirteen and a half miles  we reached an
island on the north  near to which the banks overflow  while on the
south  the hills project over the river and form high cliffs  at one
point a part of the cliff  nearly three quarters of a mile in length 
and about two hundred feet in height  has fallen into the river  it is
composed chiefly of sandstone intermixed with an iron ore of bad
quality  near the bottom is a soft slatestone with pebbles  we passed
several bad sandbars in the course of the day  and made eighteen miles 
and encamped on the south  opposite to the lower point of the oven
islands  the country around is generally divided into prairies  with
little timber  except on low points  islands  and near creeks  and that
consisting of cottonwood  mulberry  elm  and sycamore  the river falls
fast  an indian dog came to the bank  he appeared to have been lost and
was nearly starved  we gave him some food  but he would not follow us 

thursday  july 19  the oven islands are small  and two in number  one
near the south shore  the other in the middle of the river  opposite to
them is the prairie  called terrien s oven  from a trader of that name 
at four and a half miles  we reached some high cliffs of a yellow earth 
on the south  near which are two beautiful runs of water  rising in the
adjacent prairies  and one of them with a deerlick  about two hundred
yards from its mouth  in this neighbourhood we observed some iron ore in
the bank  at two and a half miles above the runs  a large portion of the
hill  for nearly three quarters of a mile  has fallen into the river  we
encamped on the western extremity of an island  in the middle of the
river  having made ten and three quarter miles  the river falls a
little  the sandbars which we passed to day  are more numerous  and the
rolling sands more frequent and dangerous  than any we have seen  these
obstacles increasing as we approach the river platte  the missouri here
is wider also than below  where the timber on the banks resists the
current  while here the prairies which approach  are more easily washed
and undermined  the hunters have brought for the last few days  no
quadruped  but deer  great quantities of young geese are seen to day 
one of them brought calamus  which he had gathered opposite our
encampment  and a large quantity of sweet flag 

friday  july 20  there was a heavy dew last night  and this morning was
foggy and cool  we passed at about three miles distance  a small willow
island to the north  and a creek on the south  about twenty five yards
wide  called by the french  l eau qui pleure  or the weeping water  and
emptying itself just above a cliff of brown clay  thence we made two and
a half miles to another island  three miles further to a third  six
miles beyond which is a fourth island  at the head of which we encamped
on the southern shore  in all eighteen miles  the party  who walked on
the shore to day  found the plains to the south  rich  but much parched
with frequent fires  and with no timber  except the scattering trees
about the sources of the runs  which are numerous and fine  on the
north  is a similar prairie country  the river continues to fall  a
large yellow wolf was this day killed  for a month past the party have
been troubled with biles  and occasionally with the dysentery  these
biles were large tumours which broke out under the arms  on the legs 
and  generally  in the parts most exposed to action  which sometimes
became too painful to permit the men to work  after remaining some days 
they disappeared without any assistance  except a poultice of the bark
of the elm  or of indian meal  this disorder  which we ascribe to the
muddiness of the river water  has not affected the general health of the
party  which is quite as good  if not better  than that of the same
number of men in any other situation 

saturday  july 21  we had a breeze from the southeast  by the aid of
which we passed  at about ten miles  a willow island on the south  near
high lands covered with timber  at the bank  and formed of limestone
with cemented shells  on the opposite side is a bad sandbar  and the
land near it is cut through at high water  by small channels forming a
number of islands  the wind lulled at seven o clock  and we reached  in
the rain  the mouth of the great river platte  at the distance of
fourteen miles  the highlands which had accompanied us on the south  for
the last eight or ten miles  stopped at about three quarters of a mile
from the entrance of the platte  captains lewis and clarke ascended the
river in a periogue  for about one mile  and found the current very
rapid  rolling over sands  and divided into a number of channels  none
of which are deeper than five or six feet  one of our frenchmen  who
spent two winters on it  says that it spreads much more at some distance
from the mouth  that its depth is generally not more than five or six
feet  that there are many small islands scattered through it  and that
from its rapidity and the quantity of its sand  it cannot be navigated
by boats or periogues  though the indians pass it in small flat canoes
made of hides  that the saline or salt river  which in some seasons is
too brackish to be drank  falls into it from the south about thirty
miles up  and a little above it elkhorn river from the north  running
nearly parallel with the missouri  the river is  in fact  much more
rapid than the missouri  the bed of which it fills with moving sands 
and drives the current on the northern shore  on which it is constantly
encroaching  at its junction the platte is about six hundred yards wide 
and the same number of miles from the mississippi  with much difficulty
we worked round the sandbars near the mouth  and came to above the
point  having made fifteen miles  a number of wolves were seen and heard
around us in the evening 

july 22  the next morning we set sail  and having found at the distance
of ten miles from the platte  a high and shaded situation on the north 
we encamped there  intending to make the requisite observations  and to
send for the neighbouring tribes  for the purpose of making known the
recent change in the government  and the wish of the united states to
cultivate their friendship 




                               chap  ii 

     some account of the pawnee indians  council held with the otto and
     missouri indians  council held with another party of the
     ottoes  death of sergeant floyd  the party encamp near the mouth of
     whitestone river  the character of the missouri  with the rivers
     that enter it  the surrounding country  the various islands  bays 
     creeks   c  given in the course of the expedition 


our camp is by observation in latitude 41 degrees 3  11   immediately
behind it is a plain about five miles wide  one half covered with wood 
the other dry and elevated  the low grounds on the south near the
junction of the two rivers  are rich  but subject to be overflowed 
farther up  the banks are higher  and opposite our camp the first hills
approach the river  and are covered with timber  such as oak  walnut 
and elm  the intermediate country is watered by the papillon  or
butterfly creek  of about eighteen yards wide  and three miles from the
platte  on the north are high open plains and prairies  and at nine
miles from the platte  the musquitoe creek  and two or three small
willow islands  we stayed here several days  during which we dried our
provisions  made new oars  and prepared our despatches and maps of the
country we had passed  for the president of the united states  to whom
we intend to send them by a periogue from this place  the hunters have
found game scarce in this neighbourhood  they have seen deer  turkies 
and grouse  we have also an abundance of ripe grapes  and one of our men
caught a white catfish  the eyes of which were small  and its tail
resembling that of a dolphin  the present season is that in which the
indians go out into the prairies to hunt the buffaloe  but as we
discovered some hunter s tracks  and observed the plains on fire in the
direction of their villages  we hoped that they might have returned to
gather the green indian corn  and therefore despatched two men to the
ottoes or pawnee villages with a present of tobacco  and an invitation
to the chiefs to visit us  they returned after two days absence  their
first course was through an open prairie to the south  in which they
crossed butterfly creek  they then reached a small beautiful river 
called come de cerf  or elkhorn river  about one hundred yards wide 
with clear water and a gravelly channel  it empties a little below the
ottoe village into the platte  which they crossed  and arrived at the
town about forty five miles from our camp  they found no indians there 
though they saw some fresh tracks of a small party  the ottoes were once
a powerful nation  and lived about twenty miles above the platte  on the
southern bank of the missouri  being reduced  they migrated to the
neighborhood of the pawnees  under whose protection they now live  their
village is on the south side of the platte  about thirty miles from its
mouth  and their number is two hundred men  including about thirty
families of missouri indians  who are incorporated with them  five
leagues above them  on the same side of the river  resides the nation of
pawnees  this people were among the most numerous of the missouri
indians  but have gradually been dispersed and broken  and even since
the year 1797  have undergone some sensible changes  they now consist of
four bands  the first is the one just mentioned  of about five hundred
men  to whom of late years have been added the second band  who are
called republican pawnees  from their having lived on the republican
branch of the river kanzas  whence they emigrated to join the principal
band of pawnees  the republican pawnees amount to nearly two hundred and
fifty men  the third  are the pawnees loups  or wolf pawnees  who reside
on the wolf fork of the platte  about ninety miles from the principal
pawnees  and number two hundred and eighty men  the fourth band
originally resided on the kanzas and arkansaw  but in their wars with
the osages  they were so often defeated  that they at last retired to
their present position on the red river  where they form a tribe of
four hundred men  all these tribes live in villages  and raise corn  but
during the intervals of culture rove in the plains in quest of buffaloe 

beyond them on the river  and westward of the black mountains  are the
kaninaviesch  consisting of about four hundred men  they are supposed to
have emigrated originally from the pawnees nation  but they have
degenerated from the improvements of the parent tribe  and no longer
live in villages  but rove through the plains 

still further to the westward  are several tribes  who wander and hunt
on the sources of the river platte  and thence to rock mountain  these
tribes  of which little more is known than the names and the population 
are first  the staitan  or kite indians  a small tribe of one hundred
men  they have acquired the name of kites  from their flying  that is 
their being always on horseback  and the smallness of their numbers is
to be attributed to their extreme ferocity  they are the most warlike of
all the western indians  they never yield in battle  they never spare
their enemies  and the retaliation of this barbarity has almost
extinguished the nation  then come the wetapahato  and kiawa tribes 
associated together  and amounting to two hundred men  the castahana  of
three hundred men  to which are to be added the cataka of seventy five
men  and the dotami  these wandering tribes  are conjectured to be the
remnants of the great padouca nation  who occupied the country between
the upper parts of the river platte  and the river kanzas  they were
visited by bourgemont  in 1724  and then lived on the kanzas river  the
seats  which he describes as their residence  are now occupied by the
kanzas nation  and of the padoucas  there does not now exist even the
name 

july 27  having completed the object of our stay  we set sail  with a
pleasant breeze from the n w  the two horses swam over to the southern
shore  along which we went  passing by an island  at three and a half
miles  formed by a pond  fed by springs  three miles further is a large
sand island  in the middle of the river  the land on the south being
high  and covered with timber  that on the north  a high prairie  at ten
and a half miles from our encampment  we saw and examined a curious
collection of graves or mounds  on the south side of the river  not far
from a low piece of land and a pond  is a tract of about two hundred
acres in circumference  which is covered with mounds of different
heights  shapes  and sizes  some of sand  and some of both earth and
sand  the largest being nearest the river  these mounds indicate the
position of the ancient village of the ottoes  before they retired to
the protection of the pawnees  after making fifteen miles  we encamped
on the south  on the bank of a high handsome prairie  with lofty
cottonwood in groves  near the river 

july 28  at one mile  this morning we reached a bluff  on the north 
being the first highlands  which approach the river on that side  since
we left the nadawa  above this  is an island and a creek  about fifteen
yards wide  which  as it has no name  we called indian knob creek  from
a number of round knobs bare of timber  on the highlands  to the north 
a little below the bluff  on the north  is the spot where the ayauway
indians formerly lived  they were a branch of the ottoes  and emigrated
from this place to the river desmoines  at ten and three quarter miles 
we encamped on the north  opposite an island  in the middle of the
river  the land  generally  on the north  consists of high prairie and
hills  with timber  on the south  low and covered with cottonwood  our
hunter brought to us in the evening  a missouri indian  whom he had
found  with two others  dressing an elk  they were perfectly friendly 
gave him some of the meat  and one of them agreed to accompany him to
the boat  he is one of the few remaining missouris  who live with the
ottoes  he belongs to a small party  whose camp is four miles from the
river  and he says  that the body of the nation is now hunting buffaloe
in the plains  he appeared quite sprightly  and his language resembled
that of the osage  particularly in his calling a chief  inca  we sent
him back with one of our party next morning 

sunday  july 29  with an invitation to the indians  to meet us above on
the river  and then proceeded  we soon came to a northern bend in the
river  which runs within twenty yards of indian knob creek  the water of
which is five feet higher than that of the missouri  in less than two
miles  we passed boyer s creek on the north  of twenty five yards width 
we stopped to dine under a shade  near the highland on the south  and
caught several large catfish  one of them nearly white  and all very
fat  above this highland  we observed the traces of a great hurricane 
which passed the river obliquely from n w  to s e  and tore up large
trees  some of which perfectly sound  and four feet in diameter  were
snapped off near the ground  we made ten miles to a wood on the north 
where we encamped  the missouri is much more crooked  since we passed
the river platte  though generally speaking  not so rapid  more of
prairie  with less timber  and cottonwood in the low grounds  and oak 
black walnut  hickory  and elm 

july 30  we went early in the morning  three and a quarter miles  and
encamped on the south  in order to wait for the ottoes  the land here
consists of a plain  above the highwater level  the soil of which is
fertile  and covered with a grass from five to eight feet high 
interspersed with copses of large plums  and a currant  like those of
the united states  it also furnishes two species of honeysuckle  one
growing to a kind of shrub  common about harrodsburgh  kentucky   the
other is not so high  the flowers grow in clusters  are short  and of a
light pink colour  the leaves too  are distinct  and do not surround the
stalk  as do those of the common honeysuckle of the united states  back
of this plain  is a woody ridge about seventy feet above it  at the end
of which we formed our camp  this ridge separates the lower from a
higher prairie  of a good quality  with grass  of ten or twelve inches
in height  and extending back about a mile  to another elevation of
eighty or ninety feet  beyond which is one continued plain  near our
camp  we enjoy from the bluffs a most beautiful view of the river  and
the adjoining country  at a distance  varying from four to ten miles 
and of a height between seventy and three hundred feet  two parallel
ranges of highland affords a passage to the missouri  which enriches the
low grounds between them  in its winding course  it nourishes the willow
islands  the scattered cottonwood  elm  sycamore  lynn  and ash  and the
groves are interspersed with hickory  walnut  coffeenut  and oak 

july 31  the meridian altitude of this day made the latitude of our camp
41 degrees 18  1 4 10   the hunters supplied us with deer  turkies 
geese  and beaver  one of the last was caught alive  and in a very short
time was perfectly tamed  catfish are very abundant in the river  and we
have also seen a buffaloefish  one our men brought in yesterday an
animal called  by the pawnees  chocartoosh  and  by the french 
blaireau  or badger  the evening is cool  yet the musquitoes are still
very troublesome 

we waited with much anxiety the return of our messenger to the ottoes 
the men whom we despatched to our last encampment  returned without
having seen any appearance of its having been visited  our horses too
had strayed  but we were so fortunate as to recover them at the distance
of twelve miles  our apprehensions were at length relieved by the
arrival of a party of about fourteen ottoe and missouri indians  who
came at sunset  on the second of august  accompanied by a frenchman  who
resided among them  and interpreted for us  captains lewis and clarke
went out to meet them  and told them that we would hold a council in the
morning  in the mean time we sent them some roasted meat  pork  flour 
and meal  in return for which they made us a present of watermelons  we
learnt that our man liberte had set out from their camp a day before
them  we were in hopes that he had fatigued his horse  or lost himself
in the woods  and would soon return  but we never saw him again 

august 8  the next morning the indians  with their six chiefs  were all
assembled under an awning  formed with the mainsail  in presence of all
our party  paraded for the occasion  a speech was then made  announcing
to them the change in the government  our promises of protection  and
advice as to their future conduct  all the six chiefs replied to our
speech  each in his turn  according to rank  they expressed their joy at
the change in the government  their hopes that we would recommend them
to their great father  the president   that they might obtain trade and
necessaries  they wanted arms as well for hunting as for defence  and
asked our mediation between them and the mahas  with whom they are now
at war  we promised to do so  and wished some of them to accompany us to
that nation  which they declined  for fear of being killed by them  we
then proceeded to distribute our presents  the grand chief of the nation
not being of the party  we sent him a flag  a medal  and some ornaments
for clothing  to the six chiefs who were present  we gave a medal of the
second grade to one ottoe chief  and one missouri chief  a medal of the
third grade to two inferior chiefs of each nation  the customary mode of
recognizing a chief  being to place a medal round his neck  which is
considered among his tribe as a proof of his consideration abroad  each
of these medals was accompanied by a present of paint  garters  and
cloth ornaments of dress  and to this we added a cannister of powder  a
bottle of whiskey  and a few presents to the whole  which appeared to
make them perfectly satisfied  the airgun too was fired  and astonished
them greatly  the absent grand chief was an ottoe named weahrushhah 
which  in english  degenerates into little thief  the two principal
chieftains present were  shongotongo  or big horse  and wethea  or
hospitality  also shosgusean  or white horse  an ottoe  the first an
ottoe  the second a missouri  the incidents just related  induced us to
give to this place the name of the council bluff  the situation of it
is exceedingly favourable for a fort and trading factory  as the soil
is well calculated for bricks  and there is an abundance of wood in the
neighbourhood  and the air being pure and healthy  it is also central to
the chief resorts of the indians  one day s journey to the ottoes  one
and a half to the great pawnees  two days from the mahas  two and a
quarter from the pawnees loups village  convenient to the hunting
grounds of the sioux  and twenty five days journey to santa fee 

the ceremonies of the council being concluded  we set sail in the
afternoon  and encamped at the distance of five miles  on the south
side  where we found the musquitoes very troublesome 

august 4  a violent wind  accompanied by rain  purified and cooled the
atmosphere last night  we proceeded early  and reached a very narrow
part of the river  where the channel is confined within a space of two
hundred yards  by a sand point on the north  and a bend on the south 
the banks in the neighbourhood washing away  the trees falling in  and
the channel filled with buried logs  above this is a trading house  on
the south  where one of our party passed two years  trading with the
mahas  at nearly four miles  is a creek on the south  emptying opposite
a large island of sand  between this creek and our last night s
encampment  the river has changed its bed  and encroached on the
southern shore  about two miles further  is another creek on the south 
which  like the former  is the outlet of three ponds  communicating with
each other  and forming a small lake  which is fed by streams from the
highlands  at fifteen miles  we encamped on the south  the hills on both
sides of the river are nearly twelve or fifteen miles from each other 
those of the north containing some timber  while the hills of south are
without any covering  except some scattering wood in the ravines  and
near where the creeks pass into the hills  rich plains and prairies
occupying the intermediate space  and partially covered  near the water 
with cottonwood  there has been a great deal of pumice stone on shore
to day 

august 5th  we set out early  and  by means of our oars  made twenty and
a half miles  though the river was crowded with sandbars  on both sides
the prairies extend along the river  the banks being covered with great
quantities of grapes  of which three different species are now ripe  one
large and resembling the purple grape  we had some rain this morning 
attended by high wind  but generally speaking  have remarked that
thunder storms are less frequent than in the atlantic states  at this
season  snakes too are less frequent  though we killed one to day of the
shape and size of the rattlesnake  but of a lighter colour  we fixed our
camp on the north side  in the evening  captain clarke  in pursuing some
game  in an eastern direction  found himself at the distance of three
hundred and seventy yards from the camp  at a point of the river whence
we had come twelve miles  when the water is high  this peninsula is
overflowed  and judging from the customary and notorious changes in the
river  a few years will be sufficient to force the main current of the
river across  and leave the great bend dry  the whole lowland between
the parallel range of hills seems formed of mud or ooze of the river  at
some former period  mixed with sand and clay  the sand of the
neighbouring banks accumulates with the aid of that brought down the
stream  and forms sandbars  projecting into the river  these drive the
channel to the opposite banks  the loose texture of which it undermines 
and at length deserts its ancient bed for a new and shorter passage  it
is thus that the banks of the missouri are constantly falling  and the
river changing its bed 

august 6  in the morning  after a violent storm of wind and rain from
n w  we passed a large island to the north  in the channel separating it
from the shore  a creek called soldier s river enters  the island kept
it from our view  but one of our men who had seen it  represents it as
about forty yards wide at its mouth  at five miles  we came to a bend
of the river towards the north  a sandbar  running in from the south 
had turned its course so as to leave the old channel quite dry  we again
saw the same appearance at our encampment  twenty and a half miles
distant on the north side  here the channel of the river had encroached
south  and the old bed was without water  except a few ponds  the
sandbars are still very numerous 

august 7  we had another storm from the n w  in the course of the last
evening  in the morning we proceeded  having the wind from the north 
and encamped on the northern shore  having rowed seventeen miles  the
river is here encumbered with sandbars  but no islands  except two small
ones  called detachment islands  and formed on the south side by a small
stream 

we despatched four men back to the ottoes village in quest of our man 
liberte  and to apprehend one of the soldiers  who left us on the 4th 
under pretence of recovering a knife which he had dropped a short
distance behind  and who we fear has deserted  we also sent small
presents to the ottoes and missouris  and requested that they would join
us at the maha village  where a peace might be concluded between them 

august 8  at two miles distance  this morning we came to a part of the
river  where there was concealed timber difficult to pass  the wind was
from the n w  and we proceeded in safety  at six miles  a river empties
on the northern side  called by the sioux indians  eaneahwadepon  or
stone river  and by the french  petite riviere des sioux  or little
sioux river  at its confluence it is eighty yards wide  our interpreter 
mr  durion  who has been to the sources of it  and knows the adjoining
country  says that it rises within about nine miles of the river
desmoines  that within fifteen leagues of that river it passes through a
large lake nearly sixty miles in circumference  and divided into two
parts by rocks which approach each other very closely  its width is
various  it contains many islands  and is known by the name of the lac
d esprit  it is near the dogplains  and within four days march of the
mahas  the country watered by it  is open and undulating  and may be
visited in boats up the river for some distance  the desmoines  he adds 
is about eighty yards wide where the little sioux river approaches it 
it is shoaly  and one of its principal branches is called cat river  two
miles beyond this river is a long island which we called pelican island 
from the numbers of that animal which were feeding on it  one of these
being killed  we poured into his bag five gallons of water  an elk  too 
was shot  and we had again to remark that snakes are rare in this part
of the missouri  a meridian altitude near the little sioux river made
the latitude 41 degrees 42  34   we encamped on the north  having come
sixteen miles 

august 9  a thick fog detained us until past seven o clock  after which
we proceeded with a gentle breeze from the southeast  after passing two
sandbars we reached  at seven and a half miles  a point of highland on
the left  near which the river has forced itself a channel across a
peninsula  leaving on the right a circuit of twelve or eighteen miles 
which is now recognised by the ponds and islands it contains  at
seventeen and a half miles  we reached a point on the north  where we
encamped  the hills are at a great distance from the river for the last
several days  the land  on both sides low  and covered with cottonwood
and abundance of grape vines  an elk was seen to day  a turkey also
shot  and near our camp is a beaver den  the musquitoes have been more
troublesome than ever for the two last days 

august 10  at two and a half miles  we came to a place  called coupee a
jacques  where the river has found a new bed  and abridged a circuit of
several miles  at twelve and a half miles  a cliff of yellow stone on
the left  this is the first highland near the river above the
council bluff  after passing a number of sandbars we reached a willow
island at the distance of twenty two and a half miles  which we were
enabled to do with our oars and a wind from the s w  and encamped on the
north side 

august 11  after a violent wind from the n w  attended with rain  we
sailed along the right of the island  at nearly five miles  we halted on
the south side for the purpose of examining a spot where one of the
great chiefs of the mahas named blackbird  who died about four years ago
of the smallpox  was buried  a hill of yellow soft sandstone rises from
the river in bluffs of various heights  till it ends in a knoll about
three hundred feet above the water  on the top of this a mound  of
twelve feet diameter at the base and six feet high  is raised over the
body of the deceased king  a pole of about eight feet high is fixed in
the centre  on which we placed a white flag  bordered with red  blue 
and white  the blackbird seems to have been a personage of great
consideration  for ever since his death he is supplied with provisions 
from time to time  by the superstitious regard of the mahas  we
descended to the river and passed a small creek on the south  called  by
the mahas  waucandipeeche   great spirit is bad   near this creek and
the adjoining hills the mahas had a village  and lost four hundred of
their nation by the dreadful malady which destroyed the blackbird  the
meridian altitude made the latitude 42 degrees 1  3 8 10  north  we
encamped  at seventeen miles distance  on the north side in a bend of
the river  during our day s course it has been crooked  we observed a
number of places in it where the old channel is filled up  or gradually
becoming covered with willow and cottonwood  great numbers of herons are
observed to day  and the mosquitoes annoy us very much 

august 12  a gentle breeze from the south  carried us along about ten
miles  when we stopped to take meridian altitude  and sent a man across
to our place of observation  yesterday he stepped nine hundred and
seventy four yards  and the distance we had come round  was eighteen
miles and three quarters  the river is wider and shallower than usual 
four miles beyond this bend a bluff begins  and continues several
miles  on the south it rises from the water at different heights  from
twenty to one hundred and fifty feet  and higher as it recedes on the
river  it consists of yellow and brown clay  with soft sandstone imbeded
in it  and is covered with timber  among which may be observed some red
cedar  the lands on the opposite side are low and subject to inundation 
but contain willows  cottonwood  and many grapes  a prairie wolf came
near the bank and barked at us  we attempted unsuccessfully to take him 
this part of the river abounds in beaver  we encamped on a sand island
in a bend to the north  having made twenty miles and a quarter 

august 13  set out at daylight with a breeze from the southeast  and
passed several sandbars  between ten and eleven miles  we came to a spot
on the south  where a mr  mackay had a trading establishment in the year
1795 and 1796  which he called fort charles  at fourteen miles  we
reached a creek on the south  on which the mahas reside  and at
seventeen miles and a quarter  formed a camp on a sandbar  to the south
side of the river  opposite the lower point of a large island  from this
place sergeant ordway and four men were detached to the maha village
with a flag and a present  in order to induce them to come and hold a
council with us  they returned at twelve o clock the next day  august
14  after crossing a prairie covered with high grass  they reached the
maha creek  along which they proceeded to its three forks  which join
near the village  they crossed the north branch and went along the
south  the walk was very fatiguing  as they were forced to break their
way through grass  sunflowers and thistles  all above ten feet high  and
interspersed with wild pea  five miles from our camp they reached the
position of the ancient maha village  it had once consisted of three
hundred cabins  but was burnt about four years ago  soon after the
smallpox had destroyed four hundred men  and a proportion of women and
children  on a hill  in the rear of the village  are the graves of the
nation  to the south of which runs the fork of the maha creek  this they
crossed where it was about ten yards wide  and followed its course to
the missouri  passing along a ridge of hill for one and a half mile  and
a long pond between that and the missouri  they then recrossed the maha
creek  and arrived at the camp  having seen no tracks of indians nor any
sign of recent cultivation 

in the morning 15th  some men were sent to examine the cause of a large
smoke from the northeast  and which seemed to indicate that some indians
were near  but they found that a small party  who had lately passed that
way  had left some trees burning  and that the wind from that quarter
blew the smoke directly towards us  our camp lies about three miles
northeast from the old maha village  and is in latitude 42 degrees 15 
41   the accounts we have had of the effects of the smallpox on that
nation are most distressing  it is not known in what way it was first
communicated to them  though probably by some war party  they had been a
military and powerful people  but when these warriors saw their strength
wasting before a malady which they could not resist  their phrenzy was
extreme  they burnt their village  and many of them put to death their
wives and children  to save them from so cruel an affliction  and that
all might go together to some better country 

on the 16th  we still waited for the indians  a party had gone out
yesterday to the maha creek  which was damned up by the beaver between
the camp and the village  a second went to day  they made a kind of drag
with small willows and bark  and swept the creek  the first company
brought three hundred and eighteen  the second upwards of eight hundred 
consisting of pike  bass  fish resembling salmon  trout  redhorse 
buffaloe  one rockfish  one flatback  perch  catfish  a small species of
perch called  on the ohio  silverfish  a shrimp of the same size  shape
and flavour of those about neworleans  and the lower part of the
mississippi  we also found very fat muscles  and on the river as well as
the creek  are different kinds of ducks and plover  the wind  which in
the morning had been from the northwest  shifted round in the evening to
the southeast  and as usual we had a breeze  which cooled the air and
relieve us from the musquitoes  who generally give us great trouble 

friday 17  the wind continued from the southeast  and the morning was
fair  we observe about us a grass resembling wheat  except that the
grain is like rye  also some similar to both rye and barley  and a kind
of timothy  the seed of which branches from the main stock  and is more
like a flaxseed than a timothy  in the evening  one of the party sent to
the ottoes  returned with the information that the rest were coming on
with the deserter  they had also caught liberte  but  by a trick  he
made his escape  they were bringing three of the chiefs in order to
engage our assistance in making peace with the mahas  this nation having
left their village  that desirable purpose cannot be effected  but in
order to bring in any neighbouring tribes  we set the surrounding
prairies on fire  this is the customary signal made by traders to
apprize the indians of their arrival  it is also used between different
nations as an indication of any event which they have previously agreed
to announce in that way  and as soon as it is seen collects the
neighbouring tribes  unless they apprehend that it is made by their
enemies 

august 18  in the afternoon the party arrived with the indians 
consisting of the little thief and the big horse  whom we had seen on
the third  together with six other chiefs  and a french interpreter  we
met them under a shade  and after they had finished a repast with which
we supplied them  we inquired into the origin of the war between them
and the mahas  which they related with great frankness  it seems that
two of the missouris went to the mahas to steal horses  but were
detected and killed  the ottoes and missouris thought themselves bound
to avenge their companions  and the whole nations were at last obliged
to share in the dispute  they are also in fear of a war from the
pawnees  whose village they entered this summer  while the inhabitants
were hunting  and stole their corn  this ingenuous confession did not
make us the less desirous of negotiating a peace for them  but no
indians have as yet been attracted by our fire  the evening was closed
by a dance  and the next day 

august 19  the chiefs and warriors being assembled at ten o clock  we
explained the speech we had already sent from the council bluffs  and
renewed our advice  they all replied in turn  and the presents were then
distributed  we exchanged the small medal we had formerly given to the
big horse for one of the same size with that of little thief  we also
gave a small medal to a third chief  and a kind of certificate or letter
of acknowledgment to five of the warriors expressive of our favour and
their good intentions  one of them dissatisfied  returned us the
certificate  but the chief  fearful of our being offended  begged that
it might be restored to him  this we declined  and rebuked them severely
for having in view mere traffic instead of peace with their neighbours 
this displeased them at first  but they at length all petitioned that it
should be given to the warrior  who then came forward and made an
apology to us  we then delivered it to the chief to be given to the most
worthy  and he bestowed it on the same warrior  whose name was great
blue eyes  after a more substantial present of small articles and
tobacco  the council was ended with a dram to the indians  in the
evening we exhibited different objects of curiosity  and particularly
the airgun  which gave them great surprise  those people are almost
naked  having no covering  except a sort of breechcloth round the
middle  with a loose blanket or buffaloe robe painted  thrown over them 
the names of these warriors  besides those already mentioned were
karkapaha   or crow s head  and nenasawa  or black cat  missouris  and
sananona  or iron eyes  neswaunja  or big ox  stageaunja  or big blue
eyes  and wasashaco  or brave man  all ottoes  these two tribes speak
very nearly the same language  they all begged us to give them whiskey 

the next morning  august 20  the indians mounted their horses and left
us  having received a canister of whiskey at parting  we then set sail 
and after passing two islands on the north  came to on that side under
some bluffs  the first near the river since we left the ayauwa village 
here we had the misfortune to lose one of our sergeants  charles floyd 
he was yesterday seized with a bilious cholic  and all our care and
attention were ineffectual to relieve him  a little before his death  he
said to captain clark   i am going to leave you   his strength failed
him as he added  i want you to write me a letter   but he died with a
composure which justified the high opinion we had formed of his firmness
and good conduct  he was buried on the top of the bluff with the honours
due to a brave soldier  and the place of his interment marked by a cedar
post  on which his name and the day of his death were inscribed  about a
mile beyond this place  to which we gave his name  is a small river
about thirty yards wide  on the north  which we called floyd s river 
where we encamped  we had a breeze from the southeast  and made thirteen
miles 

august 21  the same breeze from the southeast carried us by a small
willow creek on the north  about one mile and a half above floyd s
river  here began a range of bluffs which continued till near the mouth
of the great sioux river  three miles beyond floyd s  this river comes
in from the north  and is about one hundred and ten yards wide  mr 
durion  our sioux interpreter  who is well acquainted with it  says that
it is navigable upwards of two hundred miles to the falls  and even
beyond them  that its sources are near those of the st  peters  he also
says  that below the falls a creek falls in from the eastward  after
passing through cliffs of red rock  of this the indians make their
pipes  and the necessity of procuring that article  has introduced a
sort of law of nations  by which the banks of the creek are sacred  and
even tribes at war meet without hostility at these quarries  which
possess a right of asylum  thus we find even among savages certain
principles deemed sacred  by which the rigours of their merciless system
of warfare are mitigated  a sense of common danger  where stronger ties
are wanting  gives all the binding force of more solemn obligations  the
importance of preserving the known and settled rules of warfare among
civilized nations  in all their integrity  becomes strikingly evident 
since even savages  with their few precarious wants  cannot exist in a
state of peace or war where this faith is once violated  the wind became
southerly  and blew with such violence that we took a reef in our sail 
it also blew the sand from the bars in such quantities  that we could
not see the channel at any distance ahead  at four and a quarter miles 
we came to two willow islands  beyond which are several sandbars  and at
twelve miles  a spot where the mahas once had a village  now no longer
existing  we again passed a number of sandbars  and encamped on the
south  having come twenty four and three quarter miles  the country
through which we passed has the same uniform appearance ever since we
left the river platte  rich low grounds near the river  succeeded by
undulating prairies  with timber near the waters  some wolves were seen
to day on the sandbeaches to the south  we also procured an excellent
fruit  resembling a red currant  growing on a shrub like the privy  and
about the height of a wild plum 

august 22  about three miles distance  we joined the men who had been
sent from the maha village with our horses  and who brought us two deer 
the bluffs or hills which reach the river at this place  on the south 
contain allum  copperas  cobalt which had the appearance of soft
isinglass  pyrites  and sandstone  the two first very pure  above this
bluff comes in a small creek on the south  which we call rologe creek 
seven miles above is another cliff  on the same side  of allum rock  of
a dark brown colour  containing in its crevices great quantities of
cobalt  cemented shells  and red earth  from this the river bends to the
eastward  and approaches the sioux river within three or four miles  we
sailed the greater part of the day  and made nineteen miles to our camp
on the north side  the sandbars are as usual numerous  there are also
considerable traces of elk  but none are yet seen  captain lewis in
proving the quality of some of the substances in the first cliff  was
considerably injured by the fumes and taste of the cobalt  and took some
strong medicine to relieve him from its effects  the appearance of these
mineral substances enable us to account for disorders of the stomach 
with which the party had been affected since they left the river sioux 
we had been in the habit of dipping up the water of the river
inadvertently and making use of it  till  on examination  the sickness
was thought to proceed from a scum covering the surface of the water
along the southern shore  and which  as we now discovered  proceeded
from these bluffs  the men had been ordered  before we reached the
bluffs  to agitate the water  so as to disperse the scum  and take the
water  not at the surface  but at some depth  the consequence was  that
these disorders ceased  the biles too which had afflicted the men  were
not observed beyond the sioux river  in order to supply the place of
sergeant floyd  we permitted the men to name three persons  and patrick
gass having the greatest number of votes was made a sergeant 

august 23  we set out early  and at four miles came to a small run
between cliffs of yellow and blue earth  the wind  however  soon
changed  and blew so hard from the west  that we proceeded very slowly 
the fine sand from the bar being driven in such clouds  that we could
scarcely see  three and a quarter miles beyond this run  we came to a
willow island  and a sand island opposite  and encamped on the south
side  at ten and a quarter miles  on the north side is an extensive and
delightful prairie  which we called buffaloe prairie  from our having
here killed the first buffaloe  two elk swam the river to day and were
fired at  but escaped  a deer was killed from the boat  one beaver was
killed  and several prairie wolves were seen 

august 24  it began to rain last night  and continued this morning  we
proceeded  however  two and a quarter miles  to the commencement of a
bluff of blue clay  about one hundred and eighty  or one hundred and
ninety feet on the south side  it seems to have been lately on fire  and
even now the ground is so warm that we cannot keep our hands in it at
any depth  there are strong appearances of coal  and also great
quantities of cobalt  or a crystalized substance resembling it  there is
a fruit now ripe which looks like a currant  except that it is double
the size  and grows on a bush like a privy  the size of a damson  and of
a delicious flavour  its indian name means rabbit berries  we then
passed  at the distance of about seven miles  the mouth of a creek on
the north side  called by an indian name  meaning whitestone river  the
beautiful prairie of yesterday  has changed into one of greater height 
and very smooth and extensive  we encamped on the south side  at ten and
a quarter miles  and found ourselves much annoyed by the musquitoes 




                                chap  iii 

     whimsical instance of superstition of the sioux indians  council
     held with the sioux  character of that tribe  their manners   c   a
     ridiculous instance of their heroism  ancient
     fortifications  quieurre river described  vast herds of
     buffaloe  account of the petit chien or little dog  narrow escape
     of george shannon  description of whiteriver  surprising fleetness
     of the antelope  pass the river of the sioux  description of the
     grand le tour  or great bend  encamp on the teton river 


august 25  captains lewis and clarke  with ten men  went to see an
object deemed very extraordinary among all the neighbouring indians 
they dropped down to the mouth of whitestone river  about thirty yards
wide  where they left the boat  and at the distance of two hundred
yards  ascended a rising ground  from which a plain extended itself as
far as the eye could discern  after walking four miles  they crossed the
creek where it is twenty three yards wide  and waters an extensive
valley  the heat was so oppressive that we were obliged to send back our
dog to the creek  as he was unable to bear the fatigue  and it was not
till after four hours march that we reached the object of our visit 
this was a large mound in the midst of the plain about n  20 degrees w 
from the month of whitestone river  from which it is nine miles distant 
the base of the mound is a regular parallelogram  the longest side being
about three hundred yards  the shorter sixty or seventy  from the
longest side it rises with a steep ascent from the north and south to
the height of sixty five or seventy feet  leaving on the top a level
plain of twelve feet in breadth and ninety in length  the north and
south extremities are connected by two oval borders which serve as new
bases  and divide the whole side into three steep but regular gradations
from the plain  the only thing characteristic in this hill is its
extreme symmetry  and this  together with its being totally detached
from the other hills which are at the distance of eight or nine miles 
would induce a belief that it was artificial  but  as the earth and the
loose pebbles which compose it  are arranged exactly like the steep
grounds on the borders of the creek  we concluded from this similarity
of texture that it might be natural  but the indians have made it a
great article of their superstition  it is called the mountain of little
people  or little spirits  and they believe that it is the abode of
little devils  in the human form  of about eighteen inches high and with
remarkably large heads  they are armed with sharp arrows  with which
they are very skilful  and are always on the watch to kill those who
should have the hardihood to approach their residence  the tradition is 
that many have suffered from these little evil spirits  and among
others  three maha indians fell a sacrifice to them a few years since 
this has inspired all the neighbouring nations  sioux  mahas  and
ottoes  with such terror  that no consideration could tempt them to
visit the hill  we saw none of these wicked little spirits  nor any
place for them  except some small holes scattered over the top  we were
happy enough to escape their vengeance  though we remained some time on
the mound to enjoy the delightful prospect of the plain  which spreads
itself out till the eye rests upon the n w  hills at a great distance 
and those of n e  still farther off  enlivened by large herds of
buffaloe feeding at a distance  the soil of these plains is exceedingly
fine  there is  however  no timber except on the missouri  all the wood
of the whitestone river not being sufficient to cover thickly one
hundred acres  the plain country which surrounds this mound has
contributed not a little to its bad reputation  the wind driving from
every direction over the level ground obliges the insects to seek
shelter on its leeward side  or be driven against us by the wind  the
small birds  whose food they are  resort of course in great numbers in
quest of subsistence  and the indians always seem to discover an unusual
assemblage of birds as produced by some supernatural cause  among them
we observed the brown martin employed in looking for insects  and so
gentle that they did not fly until we got within a few feet of them  we
have also distinguished among numerous birds of the plain  the
blackbird  the wren or prairie bird  and a species of lark about the
size of a partridge  with a short tail  the excessive heat and thirst
forced us from the hill  about one o clock  to the nearest water  which
we found in the creek  at three miles distance  and remained an hour and
a half  we then went down the creek  through a lowland about one mile in
width  and crossed it three times  to the spot where we first reached it
in the morning  here we gathered some delicious plums  grapes and blue
currants  and afterwards arrived at the mouth of the river about sunset 
to this place the course from the mound is s  twenty miles  e  nine
miles  we there resumed our periogue  and on reaching our encampment of
last night set the prairies on fire  to warn the sioux of our approach 
in the mean time  the boat under serjeant pryor had proceeded in the
afternoon one mile  to a bluff of blue clay on the south  and after
passing a sandbar and two sand islands fixed their camp at the distance
of six miles on the south  in the evening some rain fell  we had killed
a duck and several birds  in the boat  they had caught some large
catfish 

sunday  august 26  we rejoined the boat at nine o clock before she set
out  and then passing by an island  and under a cliff on the south 
nearly two miles in extent and composed of white and blue earth 
encamped at nine miles distance  on a sandbar towards the north 
opposite to this  on the south  is a small creek called petit arc or
little bow  and a short distance above it  an old village of the same
name  this village  of which nothing remains but the mound of earth
about four feet high surrounding it  was built by a maha chief named
little bow  who being displeased with blackbird  the late king  seceded
with two hundred followers and settled at this spot  which is now
abandoned  as the two villages have reunited since the death of
blackbird  we have great quantities of grapes  and plums of three kinds 
two of a yellow colour  and distinguished by one of the species being
longer than the other  and a third round and red  all have an excellent
flavour  particularly those of the yellow kind 

august 27  the morning star appeared much larger than usual  a gentle
breeze from the southeast carried us by some large sandbars  on both
sides and in the middle of the river  to a bluff  on the south side  at
seven and a half miles distant  this bluff is of white clay or chalk 
under which is much stone  like lime  incrusted with a clear substance 
supposed to be cobalt  and some dark ore  above this bluff we set the
prairie on fire  to invite the sioux  after twelve and a half miles  we
had passed several other sandbars  and now reached the mouth of a river
called by the french jacques  james river  or yankton  from the tribe
which inhabits its banks  it is about ninety yards wide at the
confluence  the country which it waters is rich prairie  with little
timber  it becomes deeper and wider above its mouth  and may be
navigated a great distance  as its sources rise near those of st 
peter s  of the mississippi  and the red river of lake winnipeg  as we
came to the mouth of the river  an indian swam to the boat  and  on our
landing  we were met by two others  who informed us that a large body of
sioux were encamped near us  they accompanied three of our men  with an
invitation to meet us at a spot above the river  the third indian
remained with us  he is a maha boy  and says that his nation have gone
to the pawnees to make peace with them  at fourteen miles  we encamped
on a sandbar to the north  the air was cool  the evening pleasant  the
wind from the southeast  and light  the river has fallen gradually  and
is now low 

tuesday  28th  we passed  with a stiff breeze from the south  several
sandbars  on the south is a prairie which rises gradually from the water
to the height of a bluff  which is  at four miles distance  of a whitish
colour  and about seventy or eighty feet high  further on is another
bluff  of a brownish colour  on the north side  and at the distance of
eight and a half miles is the beginning of calumet bluff  on the south
side  under which we formed our camp  in a beautiful plain  to wait the
arrival of the sioux  at the first bluff the young indian left us and
joined their camp  before reaching calumet bluff one of the periogues
ran upon a log in the river  and was rendered unfit for service  so that
all our loading was put into the second periogue  on both sides of the
river are fine prairies  with cotton wood  and near the bluff there is
more timber in the points and valleys than we have been accustomed to
see 

wednesday  29th  we had a violent storm of wind and rain last evening 
and were engaged during the day in repairing the periogue  and other
necessary occupations  when  at four o clock in the afternoon  sergeant
pryor and his party arrived on the opposite side  attended by five
chiefs  and about seventy men and boys  we sent a boat for them  and
they joined us  as did also mr  durion  the son of our interpreter  who
happened to be trading with the sioux at this time  he returned with
sergeant pryor to the indians  with a present of tobacco  corn  and a
few kettles  and told them that we would speak to their chiefs in the
morning  sergeant pryor reported  that on reaching their village  which
is at twelve miles distance from our camp  he was met by a party with a
buffaloe robe  on which they desired to carry their visitors  an honour
which they declined  informing the indians that they were not the
commanders of the boats  as a great mark of respect  they were then
presented with a fat dog  already cooked  of which they partook
heartily  and found it well flavoured  the camps of the sioux are of a
conical form  covered with buffaloe robes  painted with various figures
and colours  with an aperture in the top for the smoke to pass through 
the lodges contain from ten to fifteen persons  and the interior
arrangement is compact and handsome  each lodge having a place for
cooking detached from it 

august 30th  thursday  the fog was so thick that we could not see the
indian camp on the opposite side  but it cleared off about eight
o clock  we prepared a speech  and some presents  and then sent for the
chiefs and warriors  whom we received  at twelve o clock  under a large
oak tree  near to which the flag of the united states was flying 
captain lewis delivered a speech  with the usual advice and counsel for
their future conduct  we then acknowledged their chiefs  by giving to
the grand chief a flag  a medal  a certificate  with a string of wampum 
to which we added a chief s coat  that is  a richly laced uniform of the
united states artillery corps  and a cocked hat and red feather  one
second chief and three inferior ones were made or recognised by medals 
and a suitable present of tobacco  and articles of clothing  we then
smoked the pipe of peace  and the chiefs retired to a bower  formed of
bushes  by their young men  where they divided among each other the
presents  and smoked and eat  and held a council on the answer which
they were to make us to morrow  the young people exercised their bows
and arrows in shooting at marks for beads  which we distributed to the
best marksmen  and in the evening the whole party danced until a late
hour  and in the course of their amusement we threw among them some
knives  tobacco  bells  tape  and binding  with which they were much
pleased  their musical instruments were the drum  and a sort of little
bag made of buffaloe hide  dressed white  with small shot or pebbles in
it  and a bunch of hair tied to it  this produces a sort of rattling
music  with which the party was annoyed by four musicians during the
council this morning 

august 31  in the morning  after breakfast  the chiefs met  and sat down
in a row  with pipes of peace  highly ornamented  and all pointed
towards the seats intended for captains lewis and clarke  when they
arrived and were seated  the grand chief  whose indian name  weucha  is 
in english shake hand  and  in french  is called le liberateur  the
deliverer  rose  and spoke at some length  approving what we had said 
and promising to follow our advice 

 i see before me   said he   my great father s two sons  you see me  and
the rest of our chiefs and warriors  we are very poor  we have neither
powder nor ball  nor knives  and our women and children at the village
have no clothes  i wish that as my brothers have given me a flag and a
medal  they would give something to those poor people  or let them stop
and trade with the first boat which comes up the river  i will bring
chiefs of the pawnees and mahas together  and make peace between them 
but it is better that i should do it than my great father s sons  for
they will listen to me more readily  i will also take some chiefs to
your country in the spring  but before that time i cannot leave home  i
went formerly to the english  and they gave me a medal and some clothes 
when i went to the spanish they gave me a medal  but nothing to keep it
from my skin  but now you give me a medal and clothes  but still we are
poor  and i wish  brothers  you would give us something for our squaws  

 when he sat down  mahtoree  or white crane  rose 

 i have listened   said he   to what our father s words were yesterday 
and i am  to day  glad to see how you have dressed our old chief  i am a
young man  and do not wish to take much  my fathers have made me a
chief  i had much sense before  but now i think i have more than ever 
what the old chief has declared i will confirm  and do whatever he and
you please  but i wish that you would take pity on us  for we are very
poor  

another chief  called pawnawneahpahbe  then said 

 i am a young man  and know but little  i cannot speak well  but i have
listened to what you have told the old chief  and will do whatever you
agree  

the same sentiments were then repeated by aweawechache 

we were surprised at finding that the first of these titles means
 struck by the pawnee   and was occasioned by some blow which the chief
had received in battle  from one of the pawnee tribe  the second is  in
english   half man   which seems a singular name for a warrior  till it
was explained to have its origin  probably  in the modesty of the chief 
who  on being told of his exploits  would say   i am no warrior  i am
only half a man   the other chiefs spoke very little  but after they had
finished  one of the warriors delivered a speech  in which he declared
he would support them  they promised to make peace with the ottoes
and missouris  the only nations with whom they are at war  all these
harangues concluded by describing the distress of the nation  they
begged us to have pity on them  to send them traders  that they wanted
powder and ball  and seemed anxious that we should supply them with
some of their great father s milk  the name by which they distinguish
ardent spirits  we then gave some tobacco to each of the chiefs  and a
certificate to two of the warriors who attended the chief  we prevailed
on mr  durion to remain here  and accompany as many of the sioux chiefs
as he could collect  down to the seat of government  we also gave his
son a flag  some clothes  and provisions  with directions to bring about
a peace between the surrounding tribe  and to convey some of their
chiefs to see the president  in the evening they left us  and encamped
on the opposite bank  accompanied by the two durions  during the evening
and night we had much rain  and observed that the river rises a little 
the indians  who have just left us  are the yanktons  a tribe of the
great nation of sioux  these yanktons are about two hundred men in
number  and inhabit the jacques  desmoines  and sioux rivers  in person
they are stout  well proportioned  and have a certain air of dignity and
boldness  in their dress they differ nothing from the other bands of
the nation whom we saw  and will describe afterwards  they are fond of
decorations  and use paint  and porcupine quills  and feathers  some of
them wore a kind of necklace of white bear s claws  three inches long 
and closely strung together round their necks  they have only a few
fowling pieces  being generally armed with bows and arrows  in which 
however  they do not appear as expert as the more northern indians  what
struck us most was an institution  peculiar to them  and to the kite
indians  further to the westward  from whom it is said to have been
copied  it is an association of the most active and brave young men 
who are bound to each other by attachment  secured by a vow  never to
retreat before any danger  or give way to their enemies  in war they go
forward without sheltering themselves behind trees  or aiding their
natural valour by any artifice  this punctilious determination  not to
be turned from their course  became heroic  or ridiculous  a short time
since  when the yanktons were crossing the missouri on the ice  a hole
lay immediately in their course  which might easily have been avoided 
by going round  this the foremost of the band disdained to do  but went
straight forward  and was lost  the others would have followed his
example  but were forcibly prevented by the rest of the tribe  these
young men sit  and encamp  and dance together  distinct from the rest of
the nation  they are generally about thirty or thirty five years old 
and such is the deference paid to courage  that their seats in council
are superior to those of the chiefs  and their persons more respected 
but  as may be supposed  such indiscreet bravery will soon diminish the
numbers of those who practise it  so that the band is now reduced to
four warriors  who were among our visitors  these were the remains of
twenty two  who composed the society not long ago  but  in a battle with
the kite indians  of the black mountains  eighteen of them were killed 
and these four were dragged from the field by their companions 

whilst these indians remained with us we made very minute inquiries
relative to their situation and numbers  and trade  and manners  this we
did very satisfactorily  by means of two different interpreters  and
from their accounts  joined to our interviews with other bands of the
same nation  and much intelligence acquired since  we were enabled to
understand  with some accuracy  the condition of the sioux hitherto so
little known 

the sioux  or dacorta indians  originally settled on the mississippi 
and called by carver  madowesians  are now subdivided into tribes  as
follow 

first  the yanktons  this tribe inhabits the sioux  desmoines  and
jacques rivers  and number about two hundred warriors 

second  the tetons of the burnt woods  this tribe numbers about three
hundred men  who rove on both sides of the missouri  the white  and
teton rivers 

third  the tetons okandandas  a tribe consisting of about one hundred
and fifty men  who inhabit both sides of the missouri below the chayenne
river 

fourth  tetons minnakenozzo  a nation inhabiting both sides of the
missouri  above the chayenne river  and containing about two hundred and
fifty men 

fifth  tetons saone  these inhabit both sides of the missouri below the
warreconne river  and consist of about three hundred men 

sixth  yanktons of the plains  or big devils  who rove on the heads of
the sioux  jacques  and red river  the most numerous of all the tribes 
and number about five hundred men 

seventh  wahpatone  a nation residing on the st  peter s  just above the
mouth of that river  and numbering two hundred men 

eighth  mindawarcarton  or proper dacorta or sioux indians  these
possess the original seat of the sioux  and are properly so denominated 
they rove on both sides of the mississippi  about the falls of st 
anthony  and consist of three hundred men 

ninth  the wahpatoota  or leaf beds  this nation inhabits both sides of
the river st  peter s  below yellow wood river  amounting to about one
hundred and fifty men 

tenth  sistasoone  this nation numbers two hundred men  and reside at
the head of the st  peter s  of these several tribes  more particular
notice will be taken hereafter 

saturday  september 1  1804  we proceeded this morning under a light
southern breeze  and passed the calumet bluffs  these are composed of
a yellowish red  and brownish clay as hard as chalk  which it much
resembles  and are one hundred and seventy  or one hundred and eighty
feet high  at this place the hills on each side come to the verge of the
river  those on the south being higher than on the north  opposite the
bluffs is a large island covered with timber  above which the highlands
form a cliff over the river on the north side  called white bear cliff 
an animal of that kind being killed in one of the holes in it  which
are numerous and apparently deep  at six miles we came to a large sand
island covered with cottonwood  the wind was high  and the weather rainy
and cloudy during the day  we made fifteen miles to a place on the north
side  at the lower point of a large island called bonhomme  or goodman s
island  the country on both sides has the same character of prairies 
with no timber  with occasional lowlands covered with cottonwood  elm
and oak  our hunters had killed an elk and a beaver  the catfish too are
in great abundance 

september 2  it rained last night  and this morning we had a high wind
from the n w  we went three miles to the lower part of an ancient
fortification on the south side  and passed the head of bonhomme island 
which is large and well timbered  after this the wind became so violent 
attended by a cold rain  that we were compelled to land at four miles on
the northern side  under a high bluff of yellow clay  about one hundred
and ten feet in height  our hunters supplied us with four elk  and we
had grapes and plums on the banks  we also saw the beargrass and rue 
on the side of the bluffs  at this place there are highlands on both
sides of the river which become more level at some distance back  and
contain but few streams of water  on the southern bank  during this day 
the grounds have not been so elevated  captain clarke crossed the river
to examine the remains of the fortification we had just passed 

                     illustration  fortification 

this interesting object is on the south side of the missouri  opposite
the upper extremity of bonhomme island  and in a low level plain  the
hills being three miles from the river  it begins by a wall composed of
earth  rising immediately from the bank of the river and running in a
direct course s  76 degrees  w  ninety six yards  the base of this wall
or mound is seventy five feet  and its height about eight  it then
diverges in a course s  84 degrees w  and continues at the same height
and depth to the distance of fifty three yards  the angle being formed
by a sloping descent  at the junction of these two is an appearance of
a hornwork of the same height with the first angle  the same wall then
pursues a course n  69 degrees w  for three hundred yards  near its
western extremity is an opening or gateway at right angles to the
wall  and projecting inwards  this gateway is defended by two nearly
semicircular walls placed before it  lower than the large walls  and
from the gateway there seems to have been a covered way communicating
with the interval between these two walls  westward of the gate  the
wall becomes much larger  being about one hundred and five feet at its
base  and twelve feet high  at the end of this high ground the wall
extends for fifty six yards on a course n  32 degrees w  it then turns
n  23 degrees w  for seventy three yards  these two walls seems to have
had a double or covered way  they are from ten to fifteen feet eight
inches in height  and from seventy five to one hundred and five feet in
width at the base  the descent inwards being steep  whilst outwards it
forms a sort of glacis  at the distance of seventy three yards  the wall
ends abruptly at a large hollow place much lower than the general level
of the plain  and from which is some indication of a covered way to the
water  the space between them is occupied by several mounds scattered
promiscuously through the gorge  in the centre of which is a deep round
hole  from the extremity of the last wall  in a course n  32 degrees w 
is a distance of ninety six yards over the low ground  where the wall
recommences and crosses the plain in a course n  81 degrees w  for
eighteen hundred and thirty yards to the bank of the missouri  in this
course its height is about eight feet  till it enters  at the distance
of five hundred and thirty three yards  a deep circular pond of
seventy three yards diameter  after which it is gradually lower  towards
the river  it touches the river at a muddy bar  which bears every mark
of being an encroachment of the water  for a considerable distance  and
a little above the junction  is a small circular redoubt  along the bank
of the river  and at eleven hundred yards distance  in a straight line
from this wall  is a second  about six feet high  and of considerable
width  it rises abruptly from the bank of the missouri  at a point where
the river bends  and goes straight forward  forming an acute angle with
the last wall  till it enters the river again  not far from the mounds
just described  towards which it is obviously tending  at the bend the
missouri is five hundred yards wide  the ground on the opposite side
highlands  or low hills on the bank  and where the river passes between
this fort and bonhomme island  all the distance from the bend  it is
constantly washing the banks into the stream  a large sandbank being
already taken from the shore near the wall  during the whole course of
this wall  or glacis  it is covered with trees  among which are many
large cotton trees  two or three feet in diameter  immediately opposite
the citadel  or the part most strongly fortified  on bonhomme island  is
a small work in a circular form  with a wall surrounding it  about six
feet in height  the young willows along the water  joined to the general
appearance of the two shores  induce a belief that the bank of the
island is encroaching  and the missouri indemnifies itself by washing
away the base of the fortification  the citadel contains about twenty
acres  but the parts between the long walls must embrace nearly five
hundred acres 

these are the first remains of the kind which we have had an opportunity
of examining  but our french interpreters assure us  that there are
great numbers of them on the platte  the kanzas  the jacques   c  and
some of our party say  that they observed two of those fortresses on the
upper side of the petit arc creek  not far from its mouth  that the wall
was about six feet high  and the sides of the angles one hundred yards
in length 

september 3  the morning was cold  and the wind from the northwest  we
passed at sunrise  three large sandbars  and at the distance of ten
miles reached a small creek  about twelve yards wide  coming in from the
north  above a white bluff  this creek has obtained the name of plum
creek  from the number of that fruit which are in the neighbourhood  and
of a delightful quality  five miles further  we encamped on the south
near the edge of a plain  the river is wide  and covered with sandbars
to day  the banks are high and of a whitish colour  the timber scarce 
but an abundance of grapes  beaver houses too have been observed in
great numbers on the river  but none of the animals themselves 

september 4  we set out early  with a very cold wind from s s e  and at
one mile and a half  reached a small creek  called whitelime creek  on
the south side  just above this is a cliff  covered with cedar trees 
and at three miles a creek  called whitepaint creek  of about thirty
yards wide  on the same side  and at four and a half miles distance from
the whitepaint creek  is the rapid river  or  as it is called by the
french  la riverequi court  this river empties into the missouri  in a
course s w  by w  and is one hundred and fifty two yards wide  and four
feet deep at the confluence  it rises in the black mountains  and passes
through a hilly country  with a poor soil  captain clark ascended three
miles to a beautiful plain  on the upper side  where the pawnees once
had a village  he found that the river widened above its mouth  and
much divided by sands and islands  which  joined to the great rapidity
of the current  makes the navigation very difficult  even for small
boats  like the platte its waters are of a light colour  like that river
too it throws out into the missouri  great quantities of sand  coarser
even than that of the platte  which form sandbars and shoals near its
mouth 

we encamped just above it  on the south  having made only eight miles 
as the wind shifted to the south  and blew so hard that in the course of
the day we broke our mast  we saw some deer  a number of geese  and shot
a turkey and a duck  the place in which we halted is a fine low ground 
with much timber  such as red cedar  honeylocust  oak  arrowwood  elm
and coffeenut 

september 5  wednesday  the wind was again high from the south  at five
miles  we came to a large island  called pawnee island  in the middle of
the river  and stopped to breakfast at a small creek on the north  which
has the name of goat creek  at eight and a half miles  near the mouth of
this creek the beaver had made a dam across so as to form a large pond 
in which they built their houses  above this island the river poncara
falls into the missouri from the south  and is thirty yards wide at the
entrance  two men whom we despatched to the village of the same name 
returned with information that they had found it on the lower side of
the creek  but as this is the hunting season  the town was so completely
deserted that they had killed a buffaloe in the village itself  this
tribe of poncaras  who are said to have once numbered four hundred
men  are now reduced to about fifty  and have associated for mutual
protection with the mahas  who are about two hundred in number  these
two nations are allied by a similarity of misfortune  they were once
both numerous  both resided in villages  and cultivated indian corn 
their common enemies  the sioux and small pox  drove them from their
towns  which they visit only occasionally for the purposes of trade 
and they now wander over the plains on the sources of the wolf and
quieurre rivers  between the pawnee island and goat creek on the north 
is a cliff of blue earth  under which are several mineral springs 
impregnated with salts  near this we observed a number of goats  from
which the creek derives its name  at three and a half miles from the
creek  we came to a large island on the south  along which we passed to
the head of it  and encamped about four o clock  here we replaced the
mast we had lost  with a new one of cedar  some bucks and an elk were
procured to day  and a black tailed deer was seen near the poncara s
village 

thursday  september 6  there was a storm this morning from the n w 
and though it moderated  the wind was still high  and the weather very
cold  the number of sandbars too  added to the rapidity of the current 
obliged us to have recourse to the towline  with all our exertions we
did not make more than eight and a half miles  and encamped on the
north  after passing high cliffs of soft  blue  and red coloured stone 
on the southern shore  we saw some goats  and great numbers of buffaloe 
in addition to which the hunters furnished us with elk  deer  turkies 
geese  and one beaver  a large catfish too was caught in the evening 
the ground near the camp  was a low prarie  without timber  though just
below is a grove of cottonwood 

friday  september 7  the morning was very cold and the wind southeast 
at five and a half miles  we reached and encamped at the foot of a round
mountain  on the south  having passed two small islands  this mountain 
which is about three hundred feet at the base  forms a cone at the top 
resembling a dome at a distance  and seventy feet or more above the
surrounding highlands  as we descended from this dome  we arrived at a
spot  on the gradual descent of the hill  nearly four acres in extent 
and covered with small holes  these are the residence of a little
animal  called by the french  petit chien  little dog  who sit erect
near the mouth  and make a whistling noise  but when alarmed take refuge
in their holes  in order to bring them out  we poured into one of the
holes five barrels of water without filling it  but we dislodged and
caught the owner  after digging down another of the holes for six feet 
we found  on running a pole into it  that we had not yet dug half way
to the bottom  we discovered  however  two frogs in the hole  and near
it we killed a dark rattlesnake  which had swallowed a small prairie
dog  we were also informed  though we never witnessed the fact  that a
sort of lizard  and a snake  live habitually with these animals  the
petit chien are justly named  as they resemble a small dog in some
particulars  though they have also some points of similarity to the
squirrel  the head resembles the squirrel in every respect  except that
the ear is shorter  the tail like that of the ground squirrel  the
toe nails are long  the fur is fine  and the long hair is gray 

saturday  september 8  the wind still continued from the southeast  but
moderately  at seven miles we reached a house on the north side  called
the pawnee house  where a trader  named trudeau  wintered in the year
1796 7  behind this  hills  much higher than usual  appear to the north 
about eight miles off  before reaching this house  we came by three
small islands  on the north side  and a small creek on the south  and
after leaving it  reached another  at the end of seventeen miles  on
which we encamped  and called it boat island  we here saw herds of
buffaloe  and some elk  deer  turkies  beaver  a squirrel  and a prairie
dog  the party on the north represent the country through which they
passed  as poor  rugged  and hilly  with the appearance of having been
lately burnt by the indians  the broken hills  indeed  approach the
river on both sides  though each is bordered by a strip of woodland near
the water 

sunday  september 9  we coasted along the island on which we had
encamped  and then passed three sand and willow islands  and a number of
smaller sandbars  the river is shallow  and joined by two small creeks
from the north  and one from the south  in the plains  to the south 
are great numbers of buffaloe  in herds of nearly five hundred  all
the copses of timber appear to contain elk or deer  we encamped on a
sandbar  on the southern shore  at the distance of fourteen and a
quarter miles 

september 10  monday  the next day we made twenty miles  the morning was
cloudy and dark  but a light breeze from the southeast carried us past
two small islands on the south  and one on the north  till  at the
distance of ten and a half miles  we reached an island  extending for
two miles in the middle of the river  covered with red cedar  from which
it derives its name of cedar island  just below this island  on a hill 
to the south  is the backbone of a fish  forty five feet long  tapering
towards the tail  and in a perfect state of petrifaction  fragments of
which were collected and sent to washington  on both sides of the river
are high dark coloured bluffs  about a mile and a half from the island 
on the southern shore  the party on that side discovered a large and
very strong impregnated spring of water  and another  not so strongly
impregnated  half a mile up the hill  three miles beyond cedar island is
a large island on the north  and a number of sandbars  after which is
another  about a mile in length  lying in the middle of the river  and
separated by a small channel  at its extremity  from another above it 
on which we encamped  these two islands are called mud islands  the
river is shallow during this day s course  and is falling a little 
the elk and buffaloe are in great abundance  but the deer have become
scarce 

september 11  tuesday  at six and a half miles we passed the upper
extremity of an island on the south  four miles beyond which is another
on the same side of the river  and about a quarter of a mile distant we
visited a large village of the barking squirrel  it was situated on a
gentle declivity  and covered a space of nine hundred and seventy yards
long  and eight hundred yards wide  we killed four of them  we then
resumed our course  and during five and a half miles passed two islands
on the north  and then encamped at the distance of sixteen miles  on the
south side of the river  and just above a small run  the morning had
been cloudy  but in the afternoon it began raining  with a high
northwest wind  which continued during the greater part of the night 
the country seen to day consists of narrow strips of lowland  rising
into uneven grounds  which are succeeded  at the distance of three
miles  by rich and level plains  but without any timber  the river
itself is wide  and crowded with sandbars  elk  deer  squirrels  a
pelican  and a very large porcupine  were our game this day  some foxes
too were seen  but not caught 

in the morning we observed a man riding on horseback down towards the
boat  and we were much pleased to find that it was george shannon  one
of our party  for whose safety we had been very uneasy  our two horses
having strayed from us on the 26th of august  he was sent to search for
them  after he had found them he attempted to rejoin us  but seeing some
other tracks  which must have been those of indians  and which he
mistook for our own  he concluded that we were ahead  and had been for
sixteen days following the bank of the river above us  during the first
four days he exhausted his bullets  and was then nearly starved  being
obliged to subsist  for twelve days  on a few grapes  and a rabbit which
he killed by making use of a hard piece of stick for a ball  one of his
horses gave out  and was left behind  the other he kept as a last
resource for food  despairing of overtaking us  he was returning down
the river  in hopes of meeting some other boat  and was on the point of
killing his horse  when he was so fortunate as to join us 

wednesday  september 12  the day was dark and cloudy  the wind from the
northwest  at a short distance we reached an island in the middle of the
river  which is covered with timber  a rare object now  we with great
difficulty were enabled to struggle through the sandbars  the water
being very rapid and shallow  so that we were several hours in making a
mile  several times the boat wheeled on the bar  and the men were
obliged to jump out and prevent her from upsetting  at others  after
making a way up one channel  the shoalness of the water forced us back
to seek the deep channel  we advanced only four miles in the whole day
and encamped on the south  along both sides of the river are high
grounds  on the southern side particularly  they form dark bluffs  in
which may be observed slate and coal intermixed  we saw also several
villages of barking squirrels  great numbers of growse  and three foxes 

september 13  thursday  we made twelve miles to day through a number of
sandbars  which make it difficult to find the proper channel  the hills
on each side are high  and separated from the river by a narrow plain on
its borders  on the north  these lowlands are covered in part with
timber  and great quantities of grapes  which are now ripe  on the south
we found plenty of plums  but they are not yet ripe  and near the dark
bluffs  a run tainted with allum and copperas  the southern side being
more strongly impregnated with minerals than the northern  last night
four beaver were caught in the traps  a porcupine was shot as it was
upon a cottontree  feeding on its leaves and branches  we encamped on
the north side  opposite to a small willow island  at night the
musquitoes were very troublesome  though the weather was cold and rainy
and the wind from the northwest 

friday  september 14  at two miles we reached a round island on the
northern side  at about five  a run on the south  two and a half miles
further  a small creek  and at nine miles encamped near the month of a
creek  on the same side  the sandbars are very numerous  and render the
river wide and shallow  and obliged the crew to get into the water and
drag the boat over the bars several times  during the whole day we
searched along the southern shore  and at some distance into the
interior  to find an ancient volcano which we heard at st  charles was
somewhere in this neighbourhood  but we could not discern the slightest
appearance of any thing volcanic  in the course of their search the
party shot a buck goat and a hare  the hills  particularly on the south 
continue high  but the timber is confined to the islands and banks of
the river  we had occasion here to observe the rapid undermining of
these hills by the missouri  the first attacks seem to be on the hills
which overhang the river  as soon as the violence of the current
destroys the grass at the foot of them  the whole texture appears
loosened  and the ground dissolves and mixes with the water  the muddy
mixture is then forced over the low grounds  which it covers sometimes
to the depth of three inches  and gradually destroys the herbage  after
which it can offer no resistance to the water  and becomes at last
covered with sand 

saturday  september 15  we passed  at an early hour  the creek near our
last night s encampment  and at two miles distance reached the mouth of
white river  coming in from the south  we ascended a short distance  and
sent a sergeant and another man to examine it higher up  this river has
a bed of about three hundred yards  though the water is confined to one
hundred and fifty  in the mouth is a sand island  and several sandbars 
the current is regular and swift  with sandbars projecting from the
points  it differs very much from the platte  and quieurre  in throwing
out  comparatively  little sand  but its general character is like that
of the missouri  this resemblance was confirmed by the sergeant  who
ascended about twelve miles  at which distance it was about the same
width as near the mouth  and the course  which was generally west  had
been interrupted by islands and sandbars  the timber consisted chiefly
of elm  they saw pine burrs  and sticks of birch were seen floating down
the river  they had also met with goats  such as we have heretofore
seen  great quantities of buffaloe  near to which were wolves  some
deer  and villages of barking squirrels  at the confluence of white
river with the missouri is an excellent position for a town  the land
rising by three gradual ascents  and the neighbourhood furnishing more
timber than is usual in this country  after passing high dark bluffs on
both sides  we reached the lower point of an island towards the south 
at the distance of six miles  the island bears an abundance of grapes 
and is covered with red cedar  it also contains a number of rabbits  at
the end of this island  which is small  a narrow channel separates it
from a large sand island  which we passed  and encamped  eight miles on
the north  under a high point of land opposite a large creek to the
south  on which we observe an unusual quantity of timber  the wind was
from the northwest this afternoon  and high  the weather cold  and its
dreariness increased by the howlings of a number of wolves around us 

september 16  sunday  early this morning  having reached a convenient
spot on the south side  and at one mile and a quarter distance  we
encamped just above a small creek  which we called corvus  having killed
an animal of that genus near it  finding that we could not proceed over
the sandbars  as fast as we desired  while the boat was so heavily
loaded  we concluded not to send back  as we originally intended  our
third periogue  but to detain the soldiers until spring  and in the mean
time lighten the boat by loading the periogue  this operation  added to
that of drying all our wet articles  detained us during the day  our
camp is in a beautiful plain  with timber thinly scattered for three
quarters of a mile  and consisting chiefly of elm  cottonwood  some ash
of an indifferent quality  and a considerable quantity of a small
species of white oak  this tree seldom rises higher than thirty feet 
and branches very much  the bark is rough  thick and of a light colour 
the leaves small  deeply indented  and of a pale green  the cup which
contains the acorn is fringed on the edges  and embraces it about one
half  the acorn itself  which grows in great profusion  is of an
excellent flavour  and has none of the roughness which most other acorns
possess  they are now falling  and have probably attracted the number of
deer which we saw on this place  as all the animals we have seen are
fond of that food  the ground having been recently burnt by the indians 
is covered with young green grass  and in the neighbourhood are great
quantities of fine plums  we killed a few deer for the sake of their
skins  which we wanted to cover the periogues  the meat being too poor
for food  the cold season coming on  a flannel shirt was given to each
man  and fresh powder to those who had exhausted their supply 

monday  september 16  whilst some of the party were engaged in the same
way as yesterday  others were employed in examining the surrounding
country  about a quarter of a mile behind our camp  and at an elevation
of twenty feet above it  a plain extends nearly three miles parallel to
the river  and about a mile back to the hills  towards which it
gradually ascends  here we saw a grove of plum trees loaded with fruit 
now ripe  and differing in nothing from those of the atlantic states 
except that the tree is smaller and more thickly set  the ground of the
plain is occupied by the burrows of multitudes of barking squirrels  who
entice hither the wolves of a small kind  hawks  and polecats  all of
which animals we saw  and presumed that they fed on the squirrel  this
plain is intersected nearly in its whole extent by deep ravines and
steep irregular rising grounds from one to two hundred feet  on
ascending the range of hills which border the plain  we saw a second
high level plain stretching to the south as far as the eye could reach 
to the westward  a high range of hills about twenty miles distant runs
nearly north and south  but not to any great extent  as their rise and
termination is embraced by one view  and they seemed covered with a
verdure similar to that of the plains  the same view extended over the
irregular hills which border the northern side of the missouri  all
around the country had been recently burnt  and a young green grass
about four inches high covered the ground  which was enlivened by herds
of antelopes and buffaloe  the last of which were in such multitudes 
that we cannot exaggerate in saying that at a single glance we saw three
thousand of them before us  of all the animals we had seen the antelope
seems to possess the most wonderful fleetness  shy and timorous they
generally repose only on the ridges  which command a view of all the
approaches of an enemy  the acuteness of their sight distinguishes the
most distant danger  the delicate sensibility of their smell defeats the
precautions of concealment  and when alarmed their rapid career seems
more like the flight of birds than the movements of an earthly being 
after many unsuccessful attempts  captain lewis at last  by winding
around the ridges  approached a party of seven  which were on an
eminence  towards which the wind was unfortunately blowing  the only
male of the party frequently encircled the summit of the hill  as if to
announce any danger to the females  who formed a group at the top 
although they did not see captain lewis  the smell alarmed them  and
they fled when he was at the distance of two hundred yards  he
immediately ran to the spot where they had been  a ravine concealed them
from him  but the next moment they appeared on a second ridge at the
distance of three miles  he doubted whether it could be the same  but
their number and the extreme rapidity with which they continued their
course  convinced him that they must have gone with a speed equal to
that of the most distinguished racehorse  among our acquisitions to day
was a mule deer  a magpie  the common deer  and buffaloe  captain lewis
also saw a hare  and killed a rattlesnake near the burrows of the
barking squirrels 

tuesday  september 18  having everything in readiness we proceeded 
with the boat much lightened  but the wind being from the n w  we made
but little way  at one mile we reached an island in the middle of the
river  nearly a mile in length  and covered with red cedar  at its
extremity a small creek comes in from the north  we then met some
sandbars  and the wind being very high and ahead  we encamped on the
south  having made only seven miles  in addition to the common deer 
which were in great abundance  we saw goats  elk  buffaloe  the black
tailed deer  the large wolves too are very numerous  and have long hair
with coarse fur  and are of a light colour  a small species of wolf
about the size of a gray fox was also killed  and proved to be the
animal which we had hitherto mistaken for a fox  there are also many
porcupines  rabbits  and barking squirrels in the neighbourhood 

september 19  we this day enjoyed a cool clear morning  and a wind from
the southeast  we reached at three miles a bluff on the south  and four
miles farther  the lower point of prospect island  about two and a half
miles in length  opposite to this are high bluffs  about eighty feet
above the water  beyond which are beautiful plains gradually rising as
they recede from the river  these are watered by three streams which
empty near each other  the first is about thirty five yards wide  the
ground on its sides high and rich  with some timber  the second about
twelve yards wide  but with less timber  the third is nearly of the same
size  and contains more water  but it scatters its waters over the large
timbered plain  and empties itself into the river at three places  these
rivers are called by the french les trois rivieres des sioux  the three
sioux rivers  and as the sioux generally cross the missouri at this
place  it is called the sioux pass of the three rivers  these streams
have the same right of asylum  though in a less degree than pipestone
creek already mentioned 

two miles from the island we passed a creek fifteen yards wide  eight
miles further  another twenty yards wide  three miles beyond which  is a
third of eighteen yards width  all on the south side  the second which
passes through a high plain we called elm creek  to the third we gave
the name of night creek  having reached it late at night  about a mile
beyond this is a small island on the north side of the river  and is
called lower island  as it is situated at the commencement of what is
known by the name of the grand detour  or great bend of the missouri 
opposite is a creek on the south about ten yards wide  which waters a
plain where there are great numbers of the prickley pear  which name we
gave to the creek  we encamped on the south  opposite the upper
extremity of the island  having made an excellent day s sail of twenty
six and a quarter miles  our game this day consisted chiefly of deer  of
these four were black tails  one a buck with two main prongs of horns on
each side and forked equally  large herds of buffaloe  elk and goats 
were also seen 

thursday  september 20  finding we had reached the big bend  we
despatched two men with our only horse across the neck  to hunt there
and wait our arrival at the first creek beyond it  we then set out with
fair weather and the wind from s e  to make the circuit of the bend 
near the lower island the sandbars are numerous  and the river shallow 
at nine and a half miles is a sand island  on the southern side  about
ten miles beyond it is a small island on the south  opposite to a small
creek on the north  this island  which is near the n w  extremity of the
bend  is called solitary island  at about eleven miles further  we
encamped on a sandbar  having made twenty seven and a half miles 
captain clarke  who early this morning had crossed the neck of the bend 
joined us in the evening  at the narrowest part  the gorge is composed
of high and irregular hills of about one hundred and eighty or one
hundred and ninety feet in elevation  from this descends an unbroken
plain over the whole of the bend  and the country is separated from it
by this ridge  great numbers of buffaloe  elk  and goats are wandering
over these plains  accompanied by grouse and larks  captain clarke saw a
hare also  on the great bend  of the goats killed to day  one is a
female differing from the male in being smaller in size  its horns too
are smaller and straighter  having one short prong  and no black about
the neck  none of these goats have any beard  but are delicately formed 
and very beautiful 

friday  september 21  between one and two o clock the serjeant on guard
alarmed us  by crying that the sandbar on which we lay was sinking  we
jumped up  and found that both above and below our camp the sand was
undermined and falling in very fast  we had scarcely got into the boats
and pushed off  when the bank under which they had been lying  fell in 
and would certainly have sunk the two periogues if they had remained
there  by the time we reached the opposite shore the ground of our
encampment sunk also  we formed a second camp for the rest of the night 
and at daylight proceeded on to the gorge or throat of the great bend 
where we breakfasted  a man  whom we had despatched to step off the
distance across the bend  made it two thousand yards  the circuit is
thirty miles  during the whole course  the land of the bend is low  with
occasional bluffs  that on the opposite side  high prairie ground  and
long ridges of dark bluffs  after breakfast  we passed through a high
prairie on the north side  and a rich cedar lowland and cedar bluff on
the south  till we reached a willow island below the mouth of a small
creek  this creek  called tyler s river  is about thirty five yards
wide  comes in on the south  and is at the distance of six miles from
the neck of the great bend  here we found a deer  and the skin of a
white wolf  left us by our hunters ahead  large quantities of different
kinds of plover and brants are in this neighbourhood  and seen
collecting and moving towards the south  the catfish are small  and not
in such plenty as we had found them below this place  we passed several
sandbars  which make the river very shallow and about a mile in width 
and encamped on the south  at the distance of eleven and a half miles 
on each side the shore is lined with hard rough gulleystones  rolled
from the hills and small brooks  the most common timber is the cedar 
though  in the prairies  there are great quantities of the prickly pear 
from this place we passed several sandbars  which make the river
shallow  and about a mile in width  at the distance of eleven and a half
miles  we encamped on the north at the lower point of an ancient island 
which has since been connected with the main land by the filling up of
the northern channel  and is now covered with cottonwood  we here saw
some tracks of indians  but they appeared three or four weeks old  this
day was warm 

september 22  a thick fog detained us until seven o clock  our course
was through inclined prairies on each side of the river  crowded with
buffaloe  we halted at a point on the north side  near a high bluff on
the south  and took a meridian altitude  which gave us the latitude of
44 degrees 11  33 3 10   on renewing our course  we reached first a
small island on the south  at the distance of four and a half miles 
immediately above which is another island opposite to a creek fifteen
yards wide  this creek  and the two islands  one of which is half a mile
long  and the second three miles  are called the three sisters  a
beautiful plain extending on both sides of the river  this is followed
by an island on the north  called cedar island  about one mile and a
half in length and the same distance in breadth  and deriving its name
from the quality of the timber  on the south side of this island  is a
fort and a large trading house  built by a mr  loisel  who wintered here
during the last year  in order to trade with the sioux  the remains of
whose camps are in great numbers about this place  the establishment is
sixty or seventy feet square  built with red cedar and picketted in
with the same materials  the hunters who had been sent ahead joined us
here  they mention that the hills are washed in gullies  in passing over
which  some mineral substances had rotted and destroyed their moccasins 
they had killed two deer and a beaver  at sixteen miles distance we came
to on the north side at the mouth of a small creek  the large stones
which we saw yesterday on the shores are now some distance in the river 
and render the navigation dangerous  the musquitoes are still numerous
in the low grounds 

sunday  september 23  we passed  with a light breeze from the southeast 
a small island on the north  called goat island  above which is a small
creek  called by the party smoke creek  as we observed a great smoke to
the southwest on approaching it  at ten miles we came to the lower point
of a large island  having passed two small willow islands with sandbars
projecting from them  this island  which we called elk island  is about
two and a half miles long  and three quarters of a mile wide  situated
near the south  and covered with cottonwood  the red currant  and
grapes  the river is here almost straight for a considerable distance 
wide and shallow  with many sandbars  a small creek on the north  about
sixteen yards wide  we called reuben s creek  as reuben fields  one of
our men  was the first of the party who reached it  at a short distance
above this we encamped for the night  having made twenty miles  the
country  generally  consists of low  rich  timbered ground on the north 
and high barren lands on the south  on both sides great numbers of
buffaloe are feeding  in the evening three boys of the sioux nation swam
across the river  and informed us that two parties of sioux were
encamped on the next river  one consisting of eighty  and the second of
sixty lodges  at some distance above  after treating them kindly we sent
them back with a present of two carrots of tobacco to their chiefs  whom
we invited to a conference in the morning 

monday  september 24  the wind was from the east  and the day fair  we
soon passed a handsome prairie on the north side  covered with ripe
plums  and the mouth of a creek on the south  called highwater creek  a
little above our encampment  at about five miles we reached an island
two and a half miles in length  and situated near the south  here we
were joined by one of our hunters  who procured four elk  but whilst he
was in pursuit of the game the indians had stolen his horse  we left the
island  and soon overtook five indians on the shore  we anchored and
told them from the boat we were friends and wished to continue so  but
were not afraid of any indians  that some of their young men had stolen
the horse which their great father had sent for their great chief  and
that we could not treat with them until he was restored  they said that
they knew nothing of the horse  but if he had been taken he should be
given up  we went on  and at eleven and a half miles  passed an island
on the north  which we called good humoured island  it is about one and
a half miles long  and abounds in elk  at thirteen and a half miles  we
anchored one hundred yards off the mouth of a river on the south side 
where we were joined by both the periogues and encamped  two thirds of
the party remained on board  and the rest went as a guard on shore with
the cooks and one periogue  we have seen along the sides of the hills on
the north a great deal of stone  besides the elk  we also observed a
hare  the five indians whom we had seen followed us  and slept with the
guard on shore  finding one of them was a chief we smoked with him  and
made him a present of tobacco  this river is about seventy yards wide 
and has a considerable current  as the tribe of the sioux which inhabit
it are called teton  we gave it the name of teton river 




                                chap  iv 

     council held with the tetons  their manners  dances   c   chayenne
     river  council held with the ricara indians  their manners and
     habits  strange instance of ricara idolatry  another
     instance  cannonball river  arrival among the mandans  character of
     the surrounding country  and of the creeks  islands   c 


september 25  the morning was fine  and the wind continued from the
southeast  we raised a flagstaff and an awning  under which we assembled
at twelve o clock  with all the party parading under arms  the chiefs
and warriors from the camp two miles up the river  met us  about fifty
or sixty in number  and after smoking delivered them a speech  but as
our sioux interpreter  mr  durion  had been left with the yanktons  we
were obliged to make use of a frenchman who could not speak fluently 
and therefore we curtailed our harangue  after this we went through the
ceremony of acknowledging the chiefs  by giving to the grand chief a
medal  a flag of the united states  a laced uniform coat  a cocked hat
and feather  to the two other chiefs a medal and some small presents 
and to two warriors of consideration certificates  the name of the great
chief is untongasabaw  or black buffaloe  the second tortohonga  or the
partisan  the third tartongawaka  or buffaloe medicine  the name of one
of the warriors was wawzinggo  that of the second matocoquepa  or second
bear  we then invited the chiefs on board  and showed them the boat  the
airgun  and such curiosities as we thought might amuse them  in this we
succeeded too well  for after giving them a quarter of a glass of
whiskey  which they seemed to like very much  and sucked the bottle  it
was with much difficulty that we could get rid of them  they at last
accompanied captain clarke on shore in a periogue with five men  but it
seems they had formed a design to stop us  for no sooner had the party
landed than three of the indians seized the cable of the periogue  and
one of the soldiers of the chief put his arms round the mast  the second
chief who affected intoxication  then said  that we should not go on 
that they had not received presents enough from us  captain clarke told
him that he would not be prevented from going on  that we were not
squaws  but warriors  that we were sent by our great father  who could
in a moment exterminate them  the chief replied  that he too had
warriors  and was proceeding to offer personal violence to captain
clarke  who immediately drew his sword  and made a signal to the boat to
prepare for action  the indians who surrounded him  drew their arrows
from their quivers and were bending their bows  when the swivel in the
boat was instantly pointed towards them  and twelve of our most
determined men jumped into the periogue and joined captain clarke  this
movement made an impression on them  for the grand chief ordered the
young men away from the periogue  and they withdrew and held a short
council with the warriors  being unwilling to irritate them  captain
clarke then went forward and offered his hand to the first and second
chiefs  who refused to take it  he then turned from them and got into
the periogue  but had not gone more than ten paces when both the chiefs
and two of the warriors waded in after him  and he brought them on
board  we then proceeded on for a mile and anchored off a willow island 
which from the circumstances which had just occurred  we called
badhumoured island 

wednesday  september 26  our conduct yesterday seemed to have inspired
the indians with fear of us  and as we were desirous of cultivating
their acquaintance  we complied with their wish that we should give them
an opportunity of treating us well  and also suffer their squaws and
children to see us and our boat  which would be perfectly new to them 
accordingly  after passing at one and a half mile a small willow island
and several sandbars  we came to on the south side  where a crowd of
men  women and children were waiting to receive us  captain lewis went
on shore and remained several hours  and observing that their
disposition was friendly we resolved to remain during the night to a
dance  which they were preparing for us  captains lewis and clarke  who
went on shore one after the other  were met on landing by ten well
dressed young men  who took them up in a robe highly decorated and
carried them to a large council house  where they were placed on a
dressed buffaloe skin by the side of the grand chief  the hall or
council room was in the shape of three quarters of a circle  covered at
the top and sides with skins well dressed and sewed together  under this
shelter sat about seventy men  forming a circle round the chief  before
whom were placed a spanish flag and the one we had given them yesterday 
this left a vacant circle of about six feet diameter  in which the pipe
of peace was raised on two forked sticks  about six or eight inches from
the ground  and under it the down of the swan was scattered  a large
fire  in which they were cooking provisions  stood near  and in the
centre about four hundred pounds of excellent buffaloe meat as a present
for us  as soon as we were seated  an old man got up  and after
approving what we had done  begged us to take pity on their unfortunate
situation  to this we replied with assurances of protection  after he
had ceased  the great chief rose and delivered an harangue to the same
effect  then with great solemnity he took some of the most delicate
parts of the dog  which was cooked for the festival  and held it to the
flag by way of sacrifice  this done  he held up the pipe of peace  and
first pointed it towards the heavens  then to the four quarters of the
globe  and then to the earth  made a short speech  lighted the pipe  and
presented it to us  we smoked  and he again harangued his people  after
which the repast was served up to us  it consisted of the dog which they
had just been cooking  this being a great dish among the sioux and used
on all festivals  to this were added  pemitigon  a dish made of buffaloe
meat  dried or jerked  and then pounded and mixed raw with grease and a
kind of ground potatoe  dressed like the preparation of indian corn
called hominy  to which it is little inferior  of all these luxuries
which were placed before us in platters with horn spoons  we took the
pemitigon and the potatoe  which we found good  but we could as yet
partake but sparingly of the dog  we eat and smoked for an hour  when it
became dark  every thing was then cleared away for the dance  a large
fire being made in the centre of the house  giving at once light and
warmth to the ballroom  the orchestra was composed of about ten men  who
played on a sort of tambourin  formed of skin stretched across a hoop 
and made a jingling noise with a long stick to which the hoofs of deer
and goats were hung  the third instrument was a small skin bag with
pebbles in it  these  with five or six young men for the vocal part 
made up the band  the women then came forward highly decorated  some
with poles in their hands  on which were hung the scalps of their
enemies  others with guns  spears or different trophies  taken in war by
their husbands  brothers  or connexions  having arranged themselves in
two columns  one on each side of the fire  as soon as the music began
they danced towards each other till they met in the centre  when the
rattles were shaken  and they all shouted and returned back to their
places  they have no step  but shuffle along the ground  nor does the
music appear to be any thing more than a confusion of noises 
distinguished only by hard or gentle blows upon the buffaloe skin  the
song is perfectly extemporaneous  in the pauses of the dance  any man of
the company comes forward and recites  in a sort of low guttural tone 
some little story or incident  which is either martial or ludicrous  or 
as was the case this evening  voluptuous and indecent  this is taken up
by the orchestra and the dancers  who repeat it in a higher strain and
dance to it  sometimes they alternate  the orchestra first performing 
and when it ceases  the women raise their voices and make a music more
agreeable  that is  less intolerable than that of the musicians  the
dances of the men  which are always separate from those of the women 
are conducted very nearly in the same way  except that the men jump up
and down instead of shuffling  and in the war dances the recitations are
all of a military cast  the harmony of the entertainment had nearly been
disturbed by one of the musicians  who thinking he had not received a
due share of the tobacco we had distributed during the evening  put
himself into a passion  broke one of the drums  threw two of them into
the fire  and left the band  they were taken out of the fire  a buffaloe
robe held in one hand and beaten with the other  by several of the
company  supplied the place of the lost drum or tambourin  and no notice
was taken of the offensive conduct of the man  we staid till twelve
o clock at night  when we informed the chiefs that they must be fatigued
with all these attempts to amuse us  and retired accompanied by four
chiefs  two of whom spent the night with us on board 

while on shore we saw twenty five squaws  and about the same number of
children  who had been taken prisoners two weeks ago  in a battle with
their countrymen the mahas  in this engagement the sioux destroyed forty
lodges  killed seventy five men  of which we saw many of the scalps  and
took these prisoners  their appearance is wretched and dejected  the
women too seem low in stature  coarse and ugly  though their present
condition may diminish their beauty  we gave them a variety of small
articles  such as awls and needles  and interceded for them with the
chiefs  to whom we recommended to follow the advice of their great
father  to restore the prisoners and live in peace with the mahas  which
they promised to do 

the tribe which we this day saw  are a part of the great sioux nation 
and are known by the name of the teton okandandas  they are about two
hundred men in number  and their chief residence is on both sides of the
missouri  between the chayenne and teton rivers  in their persons they
are rather ugly and ill made  their legs and arms being too small  their
cheekbones high  and their eyes projecting  the females  with the same
character of form  are more handsome  and both sexes appear cheerful and
sprightly  but in our intercourse with them we discovered that they were
cunning and vicious 

the men shave the hair off their heads  except a small tuft on the top 
which they suffer to grow and wear in plaits over the shoulders  to this
they seem much attached  as the loss of it is the usual sacrifice at the
death of near relations  in full dress  the men of consideration wear a
hawk s feather  or calumet feather worked with porcupine quills  and
fastened to the top of the head  from which it falls back  the face and
body are generally painted with a mixture of grease and coal  over the
shoulders is a loose robe or mantle of buffaloe skin dressed white 
adorned with porcupine quills loosely fixed so as to make a gingling
noise when in motion  and painted with various uncouth figures
unintelligible to us  but to them emblematic of military exploits  or
any other incident  the hair of the robe is worn next the skin in fair
weather  but when it rains the hair is put outside  and the robe is
either thrown over the arm  or wrapped round the body  all of which it
may cover  under this in the winter season they wear a kind of shirt
resembling ours  and made either of skin or cloth  and covering the arms
and body  round the middle is fixed a girdle of cloth or procured
dressed elk skin  about an inch in width and closely tied to the body 
to this is attached a piece of cloth or blanket or skin about a foot
wide  which passes between the legs and is tucked under the girdle both
before and behind  from the hip to the ancle he is covered by leggings
of dressed antelope skins  with seams at the sides two inches in width 
and ornamented by little tufts of hair the produce of the scalps they
have made in war  which are scattered down the leg  the winter moccasins
are of dressed buffaloe skin  the hair being worn inwards  and soaled
with thick elk skin parchment  those for summer are of deer or elk skin 
dressed without the hair  and with soals of elk skin  on great
occasions  or wherever they are in full dress  the young men drag after
them the entire skin of a polecat fixed to the heel of the moccasin 
another skin of the same animal is either tucked into the girdle or
carried in the hand  and serves as a pouch for their tobacco  or what
the french traders call the bois roule  this is the inner bark of a
species of red willow  which being dried in the sun or over the fire  is
rubbed between the hands and broken into small pieces  and is used alone
or mixed with tobacco  the pipe is generally of red earth  the stem made
of ash  about three or four feet long  and highly decorated with
feathers  hair and porcupine quills 

the hair of the women is suffered to grow long  and is parted from the
forehead across the head  at the back of which it is either collected
into a kind of bag  or hangs down over the shoulders  their moccasins
are like those of the men  as are also the leggings  which do not
however reach beyond the knee  where it is met by a long loose shift of
skin which reaches nearly to the ancles  this is fastened over the
shoulders by a string and has no sleeves  but a few pieces of the skin
hang a short distance down the arm  sometimes a girdle fastens this skin
round the waist  and over all is thrown a robe like that worn by the
men  they seem fond of dress  their lodges are very neatly constructed 
in the same form as those of the yanktons  they consist of about one
hundred cabins  made of white buffaloe hide dressed  with a larger one
in the centre for holding councils and dances  they are built round with
poles about fifteen or twenty feet high  covered with white skins  these
lodges may be taken to pieces  packed up  and carried with the nation
wherever they go  by dogs which bear great burdens  the women are
chiefly employed in dressing buffaloe skins  they seem perfectly well
disposed  but are addicted to stealing any thing which they can take
without being observed  this nation  although it makes so many ravages
among its neighbours  is badly supplied with guns  the water which they
carry with them is contained chiefly in the paunches of deer and other
animals  and they make use of wooden bowls  some had their heads shaved 
which we found was a species of mourning for relations  another usage 
on these occasions  is to run arrows through the flesh both above and
below the elbow 

while on shore to day we witnessed a quarrel between two squaws  which
appeared to be growing every moment more boisterous  when a man came
forward  at whose approach every one seemed terrified and ran  he took
the squaws  and without any ceremony whipped them severely  on inquiring
into the nature of such summary justice  we learnt that this man was an
officer well known to this and many other tribes  his duty is to keep
the peace  and the whole interior police of the village is confided to
two or three of these officers  who are named by the chief and remain in
power some days  at least till the chief appoints a successor  they seem
to be a sort of constable or sentinel  since they are always on the
watch to keep tranquillity during the day  and guarding the camp in the
night  the short duration of their office is compensated by its
authority  his power is supreme  and in the suppression of any riot or
disturbance no resistance to him is suffered  his person is sacred  and
if in the execution of his duty he strikes even a chief of the second
class  he cannot be punished for this salutary insolence  in general
they accompany the person of the chief  and when ordered to any duty 
however dangerous  it is a point of honour rather to die than to refuse
obedience  thus  when they attempted to stop us yesterday  the chief
ordered one of these men to take possession of the boat  he immediately
put his arms round the mast  and  as we understood  no force except the
command of the chief would have induced him to release his hold  like
the other men their bodies are blackened  but their distinguishing mark
is a collection of two or three raven skins fixed to the girdle behind
the back in such a way  that the tails stick out horizontally from the
body  on his head too is a raven skin split into two parts  and tied so
as to let the beak project from the forehead 

thursday september 27  we rose early  and the two chiefs took off  as a
matter of course and according to their custom  the blanket on which
they had slept  to this we added a peck of corn as a present to each 
captain lewis and the chiefs went on shore to see a part of the nation
that was expected  but did not come  he returned at two o clock  with
four of the chiefs and a warrior of distinction  called wadrapa   or on
his guard   they examined the boat and admired whatever was strange 
during half an hour  when they left it with great reluctance  captain
clarke accompanied them to the lodge of the grand chief  who invited
them to a dance  where  being joined by captain lewis  they remained
till a late hour  the dance was very similar to that of yesterday  about
twelve we left them  taking the second chief and one principal warrior
on board  as we came near the boat the man who steered the periogue  by
mistake  brought her broadside against the boat s cable  and broke it 
we called up all hands to their oars  but our noise alarmed the two
indians  they called out to their companions  and immediately the whole
camp crowded to the shore  but after half an hour they returned  leaving
about sixty men near us  the alarm given by the chiefs was said to be
that the mahas had attacked us  and that they were desirous of assisting
us to repel it  but we suspected that they were afraid we meant to set
sail  and intended to prevent us from doing so  for in the night the
maha prisoners had told one of our men  who understood the language 
that we were to be stopped  we therefore  without giving any indication
of our suspicion  prepared every thing for an attack  as the loss of our
anchor obliged to come to near a falling bank  very unfavourable for
defence  we were not mistaken in these opinions  for when in the
morning 

friday  september 28  after dragging unsuccessfully for the anchor  we
wished to set sail  it was with great difficulty that we could make the
chiefs leave the boat  at length we got rid of all except the great
chief  when just as we were setting out  several of the chief s soldiers
sat on the rope which held the boat to the shore  irritated at this we
got every thing ready to fire on them if they persisted  but the great
chief said that these were his soldiers and only wanted some tobacco  we
had already refused a flag and some tobacco to the second chief  who had
demanded it with great importunity  but willing to leave them without
going to extremities  we threw him a carrot of tobacco  saying to him 
 you have told us that you were a great man  and have influence  now
show your influence  by taking the rope from those men  and we will then
go without any further trouble   this appeal to his pride had the
desired effect  he went out of the boat  gave the soldiers the tobacco 
and pulling the rope out of their hands delivered it on board  and we
then set sail under a breeze from the s e  after sailing about two miles
we observed the third chief beckoning to us  we took him on board  and
he informed us that the rope had been held by the order of the second
chief  who was a double faced man  a little farther on we were joined by
the son of the chief  who came on board to see his father  on his return
we sent a speech to the nation  explaining what we had done  and
advising them to peace  but if they persisted in their attempts to stop
us  we were willing and able to defend ourselves  after making six
miles  during which we passed a willow island on the south and one
sandbar  we encamped on another in the middle of the river  the country
on the south side was a low prairie  that on the north highland 

september 29  we set out early  but were again impeded by sandbars 
which made the river shallow  the weather was however fair  the land on
the north side low and covered with timber contrasted with the bluffs to
the south  at nine o clock we saw the second chief and two women and
three men on shore  who wished us to take two women offered by the
second chief to make friends  which was refused  he then requested us to
take them to the other band of their nation  who were on the river not
far from us  this we declined  but in spite of our wishes they followed
us along shore  the chief asked us to give them some tobacco  this we
did  and gave more as a present for that part of the nation which we did
not see  at seven and a half miles we came to a small creek on the
southern side  where we saw great numbers of elk  and which we called
notimber creek from its bare appearance  above the mouth of this stream 
a ricara band of pawnees had a village five years ago  but there are no
remains of it except the mound which encircled the town  here the second
chief went on shore  we then proceeded  and at the distance of eleven
miles encamped on the lower part of a willow island  in the middle of
the river  being obliged to substitute large stones in the place of the
anchor which we lost 

september 30  the wind was this morning very high from the southeast  so
that we were obliged to proceed under a double reefed mainsail  through
the rain  the country presented a large low prairie covered with timber
on the north side  on the south  we first had high barren hills  but
after some miles it became of the same character as that on the opposite
side  we had not gone far when an indian ran after us  and begged to be
carried on board as far as the ricaras  which we refused  soon after  we
discovered on the hills at a distance  a great number of indians  who
came towards the river and encamped ahead of us  we stopped at a
sandbar  at about eleven miles  and after breakfasting proceeded on a
short distance to their camp  which consisted of about four hundred
souls  we anchored one hundred yards from the shore  and discovering
that they were tetons belonging to the band which we had just left  we
told them that we took them by the hand  and would make each chief a
present of tobacco  that we had been badly treated by some of their
band  and that having waited for them two days below  we could not stop
here  but referred them to mr  durion for our talk and an explanation of
our views  they then apologized for what had past  assured us that they
were friendly  and very desirous that we should land and eat with them 
this we refused  but sent the periogue on shore with the tobacco  which
was delivered to one of the soldiers of the chief  whom we had on board 
several of them now ran along the shore after us  but the chief threw
them a twist of tobacco  and told them to go back and open their ears to
our counsels  on which they immediately returned to their lodges  we
then proceeded past a continuation of the low prairie on the north 
where we had large quantities of grapes  and on the south saw a small
creek and an island  six miles above this  two indians came to the bank 
looked at us about half an hour  and then went without speaking over the
hills to the southwest  after some time  the wind rose still higher  and
the boat struck a log  turned  and was very near taking in water  the
chief became so much terrified at the danger  that he hid himself in the
boat  and as soon as we landed got his gun and told us that he wanted to
return  that we would now see no more tetons  and that we might proceed
unmolested  we repeated the advice we had already given  presented him
with a blanket  a knife  some tobacco  and after smoking with him he set
out  we then continued to a sandbar on the north side  where we
encamped  having come twenty and a half miles  in the course of the day
we saw a number of sandbars which impede the navigation  the only
animal which we observed was the white gull  then in great abundance 

october 1st  1804  the weather was very cold and the wind high from the
southeast during the night  and continued so this morning  at three
miles distance  we had passed a large island in the middle of the river 
opposite to the lower end of which the ricaras once had a village on the
south side of the river  there are  however  no remnants of it now 
except a circular wall three or four feet in height  which encompassed
the town  two miles beyond this island is a river coming in from the
southwest  about four hundred yards wide  the current gentle  and
discharging not much water  and very little sand  it takes its rise in
the second range of the cote noire or black mountains  and its general
course is nearly east  this river has been occasionally called dog
river  under a mistaken opinion that its french name was chien  but its
true appellation is chayenne  and it derives this title from the
chayenne indians  their history is the short and melancholy relation of
the calamities of almost all the indians  they were a numerous people
and lived on the chayenne  a branch of the red river of lake winnipeg 
the invasion of the sioux drove them westward  in their progress they
halted on the southern side of the missouri below the warreconne  where
their ancient fortifications still exist  but the same impulse again
drove them to the heads of the chayenne  where they now rove  and
occasionally visit the ricaras  they are now reduced  but still number
three hundred men 

although the river did not seem to throw out much sand  yet near and
above its mouth we find a great many sandbars difficult to pass  on both
sides of the missouri  near the chayenne  are rich thinly timbered
lowlands  behind which are bare hills  as we proceeded  we found that
the sandbars made the river so shallow  and the wind was so high  that
we could scarcely find the channel  and at one place were forced to drag
the boat over a sandbar  the missouri being very wide and falling a
little  at seven and a half miles we came to at a point  and remained
three hours  during which time the wind abated  we then passed within
four miles two creeks on the south  one of which we called centinel
creek  and the other lookout creek  this part of the river has but
little timber  the hills are not so high as we have hitherto seen  and
the number of sandbars extends the river to more than a mile in breadth 
we continued about four and a half miles further  to a sandbar in the
middle of the river  where we spent the night  our progress being
sixteen miles  on the opposite shore  we saw a house among the willows
and a boy to whom we called  and brought him on board  he proved to be a
young frenchman in the employ of a mr  valle a trader  who is now here
pursuing his commerce with the sioux 

tuesday  october 2  there had been a violent wind from s e  during the
night  which having moderated we set sail with mr  valle  who visited us
this morning and accompanied us for two miles  he is one of three french
traders who have halted here  expecting the sioux who are coming down
from the ricaras  where they now are  for the purposes of traffic  mr 
valle tells us that he passed the last winter three hundred leagues up
the chayenne under the black mountains  that river he represents as very
rapid  liable to sudden swells  the bed and shores formed of course
gravel  and difficult of ascent even for canoes  one hundred leagues
from its mouth it divides into two branches  one coming from the south 
the other at forty leagues from the junction enters the black mountains 
the land which it waters from the missouri to the black mountains 
resembles the country on the missouri  except that the former has even
less timber  and of that the greater proportion is cedar  the chayennes
reside chiefly on the heads of the river  and steal horses from the
spanish settlement  a plundering excursion which they perform in a
month s time  the black mountains he observes are very high  covered
with great quantities of pine  and in some parts the snow remains during
the summer  there are also great quantities of goats  white bear 
prairie cocks  and a species of animal which from his description must
resemble a small elk  with large circular horns 

at two and a half miles we had passed a willow island on the south  on
the north side of the river were dark bluffs  and on the south low rich
prairies  we took a meridian altitude on our arrival at the upper end of
the isthmus of the bend  which we called the lookout bend  and found the
latitude to be 44 degrees 19  36   this bend is nearly twenty miles
round  and not more than two miles across 

in the afternoon we heard a shot fired  and not long after observed some
indians on a hill  one of them came to the shore and wished us to land 
as there were twenty lodges of yanktons or boisbrule there  we declined
doing so  telling him that we had already seen his chiefs  and that they
might learn from mr  durion the nature of the talk we had delivered to
them  at nine miles we came to the lower point of a long island on the
north  the banks of the south side of the river being high  those of the
north forming a low rich prairie  we coasted along this island  which we
called caution island  and after passing a small creek on the south
encamped on a sandbar in the middle of the river  having made twelve
miles  the wind changed to the northwest  and became very high and cold 
the current of the river is less rapid  and the water though of the same
colour contains less sediment than below the chayenne  but its width
continues the same  we were not able to hunt to day  for as there are so
many indians in the neighbourhood  we were in constant expectation of
being attacked  and were therefore forced to keep the party together and
be on our guard 

wednesday  october 3  the wind continued so high from the northwest 
that we could not set out till after seven  we then proceeded till
twelve o clock  and landed on a bar towards the south  where we
examined the periogues  and the forecastle of the boat  and found that
the mice had cut several bags of corn  and spoiled some of our clothes 
about one o clock an indian came running to the shore with a turkey on
his back  several others soon joined him  but we had no intercourse with
them  we then went on for three miles  but the ascent soon became so
obstructed by sandbars and shoal water  that after attempting in vain
several channels  we determined to rest for the night under some high
bluffs on the south  and send out to examine the best channel  we had
made eight miles along high bluffs on each side  the birds we saw were
the white gulls and the brant which were flying to the southward in
large flocks 

thursday  4th  on examination we found that there was no outlet
practicable for us in this channel  and that we must retread our steps 
we therefore returned three miles  and attempted another channel in
which we were more fortunate  the indians were in small numbers on the
shore  and seemed willing had they been more numerous to molest us  they
called to desire that we would land  and one of them gave three yells
and fired a ball ahead of the boat  we however took no notice of it  but
landed on the south to breakfast  one of these indians swam across and
begged for some powder  we gave him a piece of tobacco only  at eight
and a half miles we had passed an island in the middle of the river 
which we called goodhope island  at one and a half mile we reached a
creek on the south side about twelve yards wide  to which we gave the
name of teal creek  a little above this is an island on the north side
of the current  about one and a half mile in length and three quarters
of a mile in breadth  in the centre of this island is an old village of
the ricaras  called lahoocat  it was surrounded by a circular wall 
containing seventeen lodges  the ricaras are known to have lived therein
1797  and the village seems to have been deserted about five years
since  it does not contain much timber  we encamped on a sandbar making
out from the upper end of this island  our journey to day being twelve
miles 

friday  october 5  the weather was very cold  yesterday evening and this
morning there was a white frost  we sailed along the highlands on the
north side  passing a small creek on the south  between three and four
miles  at seven o clock we heard some yells and saw three indians of the
teton band  who asked us to come on shore and begged for some tobacco 
to all which we gave the same answer as hitherto  at eight miles we
reached a small creek on the north  at fourteen we passed an island on
the south  covered with wild rye  and at the head a large creek comes in
from the south  which we named whitebrant creek  from seeing several
white brants among flocks of dark coloured ones  at the distance of
twenty miles we came to on a sandbar towards the north side of the
river  with a willow island opposite  the hills or bluffs come to the
banks of the river on both sides  but are not so high as they are below 
the river itself however continues of the same width  and the sandbars
are quite as numerous  the soil of the banks is dark coloured  and many
of the bluffs have the appearance of being on fire  our game this day
was a deer  a prairie wolf  and some goats out of a flock that was
swimming across the river 

saturday  october 6  the morning was still cold  the wind being from the
north  at eight miles we came to a willow island on the north  opposite
a point of timber  where there are many large stones near the middle of
the river  which seem to have been washed from the hills and high plains
on both sides  or driven from a distance down the stream  at twelve
miles we halted for dinner at a village which we suppose to have
belonged to the ricaras  it is situated in a low plain on the river  and
consists of about eighty lodges  of an octagon form  neatly covered with
earth  placed as close to each other as possible  and picketed round 
the skin canoes  mats  buckets  and articles of furniture found in the
lodges  induce us to suppose that it had been left in the spring  we
found three different sorts of squashes growing in the village  we also
killed an elk near it  and saw two wolves  on leaving the village the
river became shallow  and after searching a long time for the main
channel  which was concealed among sandbars  we at last dragged the boat
over one of them rather than go back three miles for the deepest
channel  at fourteen and a half miles we stopped for the night on a
sandbar  opposite a creek on the north  called otter creek  twenty two
yards in width  and containing more water than is common for creeks of
that size  the sides of the river during the day are variegated with
high bluffs and low timbered grounds on the banks  the river is very
much obstructed by sandbars  we saw geese  swan  brants and ducks of
different kinds on the sandbars  and on shore numbers of the prairie
hen  the magpie too is very common  but the gulls and plover  which we
saw in such numbers below  are now quite rare 

sunday  october 7  there was frost again last evening  and this morning
was cloudy and attended with rain  at two miles we came to the mouth of
a river  called by the ricaras  sawawkawna  or pork river  the party who
examined it for about three miles up  say that its current is gentle 
and that it does not seem to throw out much sand  its sources are in the
first range of the black mountains  and though it has now only water of
twenty yards width  yet when full it occupies ninety  just below the
mouth is another village or wintering camp of the ricaras  composed of
about sixty lodges  built in the same form as those passed yesterday 
with willow and straw mats  baskets and buffaloe skin canoes remaining
entire in the camp  we proceeded under a gentle breeze from the
southwest  at ten o clock we saw two indians on the north side  who told
us they were a part of the lodge of tartongawaka  or buffaloe medicine 
the teton chief whom we had seen on the twenty fifth  that they were on
the way to the ricaras  and begged us for something to eat  which we of
course gave them  at seven and a half miles is a willow island on the
north  and another on the same side five miles beyond it  in the middle
of the river between highlands on both sides  at eighteen and a half
miles is an island called grouse island  on which are the walls of an
old village  the island has no timber  but is covered with grass and
wild rye  and owes its name to the number of grouse that frequent it  we
then went on till our journey for the day was twenty two miles  the
country presented the same appearance as usual  in the low timbered
ground near the mouth of the sawawkawna  we saw the tracks of large
white bear  and on grouse island killed a female blaireau  and a deer of
the black tailed species  the largest we have ever seen 

monday  october 8  we proceeded early with a cool northwest wind  and at
two and a half miles above grouse island  reached the mouth of a creek
on the south  then a small willow island  which divides the current
equally  and at four and a half miles came to a river on the southern
side where we halted  this river  which our meridian altitude fixes at
45 degrees 39  5  north latitude  is called by the ricaras wetawhoo  it
rises in the black mountains  and its bed which flows at the mouth over
a low soft slate stone  is one hundred and twenty yards wide  but the
water is now confined within twenty yards  and is not very rapid 
discharging mud with a small proportion of sand  here as in every bend
of the river  we again observe the red berries resembling currants 
which we mentioned before  two miles above the wetawhoo  and on the same
side  is a small river called maropa by the indians  it is twenty yards
in width  but so dammed up by mud that the stream creeps through a
channel of not more than an inch in diameter  and discharges no sand 
one mile further we reached an island close to the southern shore  from
which it is separated by a deep channel of sixty yards  about half way a
number of ricara indians came out to see us  we stopped and took a
frenchman on board  who accompanied us past the island to our camp on
the north side of the river  which is at the distance of twelve miles
from that of yesterday  captain lewis then returned with four of the
party to see the village  it is situated in the centre of the island 
near the southern shore  under the foot of some high  bald  uneven
hills  and contains about sixty lodges  the island itself is three miles
long  and covered with fields in which the indians raise corn  beans 
and potatoes  several frenchmen living among these indians as
interpreters  or traders  came back with captain lewis  and particularly
a mr  gravelines  a man who has acquired the language  on setting out we
had a low prairie covered with timber on the north  and on the south
highlands  but at the mouth of the wetawhoo the southern country
changes  and a low timbered plain extends along the south  while the
north has a ridge of barren hills during the rest of the day s course 

tuesday  9th  the wind was so cold and high last night and during all
the day  that we could not assemble the indians in council  but some of
the party went to the village  we received the visits of the three
principal chiefs with many others  to whom we gave some tobacco  and
told them that we would speak to them to morrow  the names of these
chiefs were first  kakawissassa or lighting crow  second chief pocasse
or hay  third chief piaheto or eagle s feather  notwithstanding the high
waves  two or three squaws rowed to us in little canoes made of a single
buffaloe skin  stretched over a frame of boughs interwoven like a
basket  and with the most perfect composure  the object which appeared
to astonish the indians most  was captain clark s servant york  a
remarkable stout strong negro  they had never seen a being of that
colour  and therefore flocked round him to examine the extraordinary
monster  by way of amusement he told them that he had once been a wild
animal  and caught and tamed by his master  and to convince them  showed
them feats of strength which added to his looks made him more terrible
than we wished him to be  opposite our camp is a small creek on the
south  which we distinguished by the name of the chief kakawissassa 

wednesday  10th  the weather was this day fine  and as we were desirous
of assembling the whole nation at once  we despatched mr  gravelines 
who with mr  tabeau another french trader had breakfeasted with us  to
invite the chiefs of the two upper villages to a conference  they all
assembled at one o clock  and after the usual ceremonies we addressed
them in the same way in which we had already spoken to the ottoes and
sioux  we then made or acknowledged three chiefs  one for each of the
three villages  giving to each a flag  a medal  a red coat  a cocked hat
and feather  also some goods  paint and tobacco  which they divided
among themselves  after this the airgun was exhibited  very much to
their astonishment  nor were they less surprised at the colour and
manner of york  on our side we were equally gratified at discovering
that these ricaras made use of no spirituous liquors of any kind  the
example of the traders who bring it to them so far from tempting having
in fact disgusted them  supposing that it was as agreeable to them as to
the other indians  we had at first offered them whiskey  but they
refused it with this sensible remark  that they were surprised that
their father should present to them a liquor which would make them
fools  on another occasion they observed to mr  tabeau  that no man
could be their friend who tried to lead them into such follies  the
council being over they retired to consult on their answer  and the next
morning 

thursday  11th  at eleven o clock we again met in council at our camp 
the grand chief made a short speech of thanks for the advice we had
given  and promised to follow it  adding that the door was now open and
no one dare shut it  and that we might depart whenever we pleased 
alluding to the treatment we had received from the sioux  they also
brought us some corn  beans  and dried squashes  and in return we gave
them a steel mill with which they were much pleased  at one o clock we
left our camp with the grand chief and his nephew on board  and at about
two miles anchored below a creek on the south  separating the second and
third village of the ricaras  which are about half a mile distant from
each other  we visited both the villages  and sat conversing with the
chiefs for some time  during which they presented us with a bread made
of corn and beans  also corn and beans boiled  and a large rich bean
which they take from the mice of the prairie  who discover and collect
it  these two villages are placed near each other in a high smooth
prairie  a fine situation  except that having no wood the inhabitants
are obliged to go for it across the river to a timbered lowland opposite
to them  we told them that we would speak to them in the morning at
their villages separately 

thursday  12th  accordingly after breakfast we went on shore to the
house of the chief of the second village named lassel  where we found
his chiefs and warriors  they made us a present of about seven bushels
of corn  a pair of leggings  a twist of their tobacco  and the seeds of
two different species of tobacco  the chief then delivered a speech
expressive of his gratitude for the presents and the good counsels which
we had given him  his intention of visiting his great father but for
fear of the sioux  and requested us to take one of the ricara chiefs up
to the mandans and negociate a peace between the two nations  to this we
replied in a suitable way  and then repaired to the third village  here
we were addressed by the chief in nearly the same terms as before  and
entertained with a present of ten bushels of corn  some beans  dried
pumpkins  and squashes  after we had answered and explained the
magnitude and power of the united states  the three chiefs came with us
to the boat  we gave them some sugar  a little salt  and a sunglass  two
of them then left us  and the chief of the third  by name ahketahnasha
or chief of the town  accompanied us to the mandans  at two o clock we
left the indians  who crowded to the shore to take leave of us  and
after making seven and a half miles landed on the north side  and had a
clear  cool  pleasant evening 

the three villages which we have just left  are the residence of a
nation called the ricaras  they were originally colonies of pawnees  who
established themselves on the missouri  below the chayenne  where the
traders still remember that twenty years ago they occupied a number of
villages  from that situation a part of the ricaras emigrated to the
neighbourhood of the mandans  with whom they were then in alliance  the
rest of the nation continued near the chayenne till the year 1797  in
the course of which  distressed by their wars with the sioux  they
joined their countrymen near the mandans  soon after a new war arose
between the ricaras and the mandans  in consequence of which the former
came down the river to their present position  in this migration those
who had first gone to the mandans kept together  and now live in the two
lower villages  which may thence be considered as the ricaras proper 
the third village was composed of such remnants of the villages as had
survived the wars  and as these were nine in number a difference of
pronunciation and some difference of language may be observed between
them and the ricaras proper  who do not understand all the words of
these wanderers  the villages are within the distance of four miles of
each other  the two lower ones consisting of between one hundred and
fifty and two hundred men each  the third of three hundred  the ricaras
are tall and well proportioned  the women handsome and lively  and as
among other savages to them falls all the drudgery of the field and the
labours of procuring subsistence  except that of hunting  both sexes are
poor  but kind and generous  and although they receive with thankfulness
what is given to them  do not beg as the sioux did  though this praise
should be qualified by mentioning that an axe was stolen last night
from our cooks  the dress of the men is a simple pair of moccasins 
legings  and a cloth round the middle  over which a buffaloe robe is
occasionally thrown  with their hair  arms and ears decorated with
different ornaments  the women wear moccasins  legings  a long shirt
made of goats  skins  generally white and fringed  which is tied round
the waist  to those they add  like the men  a buffaloe robe without the
hair  in summer  these women are handsomer than the sioux  both of them
are however  disposed to be amorous  and our men found no difficulty in
procuring companions for the night by means of the interpreters  these
interviews were chiefly clandestine  and were of course to be kept a
secret from the husband or relations  the point of honour indeed  is
completely reversed among the ricaras  that the wife or the sister
should submit to a stranger s embraces without the consent of her
husband or brother  is a cause of great disgrace and offence  especially
as for many purposes of civility or gratitude the husband and brother
will themselves present to a stranger these females  and be gratified by
attentions to them  the sioux had offered us squaws  but while we
remained there having declined  they followed us with offers of females
for two days  the ricaras had been equally accommodating  we had equally
withstood their temptation  but such was their desire to oblige that two
very handsome young squaws were sent on board this evening  and
persecuted us with civilities  the black man york participated largely
in these favours  for instead of inspiring any prejudice  his colour
seemed to procure him additional advantages from the indians  who
desired to preserve among them some memorial of this wonderful stranger 
among other instances of attention  a ricara invited him into his house
and presenting his wife to him  retired to the outside of the door 
while there one of york s comrades who was looking for him came to the
door  but the gallant husband would permit no interruption before a
reasonable time had elapsed 

the ricara lodges are in a circular or octagonal form  and generally
about thirty or forty feet in diameter  they are made by placing forked
posts about six feet high round the circumference of the circle  these
are joined by poles from one fork to another  which are supported also
by other forked poles slanting from the ground  in the centre of the
lodge are placed four higher forks  about fifteen feet in length 
connected together by beams  from these to the lower poles the rafters
of the roof are extended so as to leave a vacancy in the middle for the
smoke  the frame of the building is then covered with willow branches 
with which is interwoven grass  and over this mud or clay  the aperture
for the door is about four feet wide  and before it is a sort of entry
about ten feet from the lodge  they are very warm and compact 

they cultivate maize or indian corn  beans  pumpkins  watermelons 
squashes  and a species of tobacco peculiar to themselves 

their commerce is chiefly with the traders who supply them with goods in
return for peltries  which they procure not only by their own hunting 
but in exchange for corn from their less civilized neighbours  the
object chiefly in demand seemed to be red paint  but they would give any
thing they had to spare for the most trifling article  one of the men
to day gave an indian a hook made out of a pin  and he gave him in
return a pair of moccasins 

they express a disposition to keep at peace with all nations  but they
are well armed with fusils  and being much under the influence of the
sioux  who exchanged the goods which they get from the british for
ricara corn  their minds are sometimes poisoned and they cannot be
always depended on  at the present moment they are at war with the
mandans  we are informed by mr  gravelines  who had passed through that
country  that the yankton or jacques river rises about forty miles to
the east or northeast of this place  the chayenne branch of the red
river about twenty miles further  passing the sioux  and the st  peter s
about eighty 

saturday  13th  in the morning our visitors left us  except the brother
of the chief who accompanies us and one of the squaws  we passed at an
early hour a camp of sioux on the north bank  who merely looked at us
without saying a word  and from the character of the tribe we did not
solicit a conversation  at ten and a half miles we reached the mouth of
a creek on the north  which takes its rise from some ponds a short
distance to the northeast  to this stream we gave the name of stoneidol
creek  for after passing a willow and sand island just above its mouth 
we discovered that a few miles back from the missouri there are two
stones resembling human figures  and a third like a dog  all which are
objects of great veneration among the ricaras  their history would adorn
the metamorphoses of ovid  a young man was deeply enamoured with a girl
whose parents refused their consent to the marriage  the youth went out
into the fields to mourn his misfortunes  a sympathy of feeling led the
lady to the same spot  and the faithful dog would not cease to follow
his master  after wandering together and having nothing but grapes to
subsist on  they were at last converted into stone  which beginning at
the feet gradually invaded the nobler parts leaving nothing unchanged
but a bunch of grapes which the female holds in her hands to this day 
whenever the ricaras pass these sacred stones  they stop to make some
offering of dress to propitiate these deities  such is the account given
by the ricara chief which we had no mode of examining  except that we
found one part of the story very agreeably confirmed  for on the river
near where the event is said to have occurred  we found a greater
abundance of fine grapes than we had yet seen  above this is a small
creek four and a half miles from stoneidol creek  which is fifteen yards
wide  comes in from the south  and received from us the name of pocasse
or hay creek  in honour of the chief of the second village  above the
ricara island  the missouri becomes narrow and deeper  the sandbars
being generally confined to the points  the current too is much more
gentle  the timber on the lowlands is also in much greater quantities 
though the high grounds are still naked  we proceeded on under a fine
breeze from the southeast  and after making eighteen miles encamped on
the north near a timbered low plain  after which we had some rain and
the evening was cold  the hunters killed one deer only 

sunday  14th  we set out in the rain which continued during the day  at
five miles we came to a creek on the south  about fifteen yards wide 
and named by us piaheto or eagle s feather  in honour of the third chief
of the ricaras  after dinner we stopped on a sandbar  and executed the
sentence of a court martial which inflicted corporal punishment on one
of the soldiers  this operation affected the indian chief very sensibly 
for he cried aloud during the punishment  we explained the offence and
the reasons of it  he acknowledged that examples were necessary  and
that he himself had given them by punishing with death  but his nation
never whipped even children from their birth  after this we continued
with the wind from the northeast  and at the distance of twelve miles 
encamped in a cove of the southern bank  immediately opposite our camp
on the north side are the ruins of an ancient fortification  the greater
part of which is washed into the river  nor could we distinguish more
than that the walls were eight or ten feet high  the evening is wet and
disagreeable  and the river which is somewhat wider than yesterday 
continues to have an unusual quantity of timber  the country was level
on both sides in the morning  but afterwards we passed some black bluffs
on the south 

monday  15th  we stopped at three miles on the north a little above a
camp of ricaras who are hunting  where we were visited by about thirty
indians  they came over in their skin canoes  bringing us meat  for
which we returned them beads and fishhooks  about a mile higher we found
another encampment of ricaras on the south  consisting of eight lodges 
here we again ate and exchanged a few presents  as we went we discerned
numbers of other indians on both sides of the river  and at about nine
miles we came to a creek on the south  where we saw many high hills
resembling a house with a slanting roof  and a little below the creek an
old village of the sharha or chayenne indians  the morning had been
cloudy  but the evening became pleasant  the wind from the northeast 
and at sunset we halted  after coming ten miles over several sandbars
and points  above a camp of ten ricara lodges on the north side  we
visited their camp  and smoked and eat with several of them  they all
appeared kind and pleased with our attentions  and the fair sex received
our men with more than hospitality  york was here again an object of
astonishment  the children would follow him constantly  and if he
chanced to turn towards them  run with great terror  the country of
to day is generally low and covered with timber on both sides  though in
the morning we passed some barren hills on the south 

tuesday  16th  at this camp the squaw who accompanied the chief left us 
two others were very anxious to go on with us  just above our camp we
passed a circular work or fort where the sharha or chayennes formerly
lived  and a short distance beyond  a creek which we called chayenne
creek  at two miles is a willow island with a large sandbar on both
sides above it  and a creek  both on the south  which we called sohaweh 
the ricara name for girl  and two miles above a second creek  to which
we gave the name of chapawt  which means woman in the same language 
three miles further is an island situated in a bend to the north  about
a mile and a half long  and covered with cottonwood  at the lower end of
this island comes in a small creek from the north  called
keetooshsahawna or place of beaver  at the upper extremity of the island
a river empties itself from the north  it is called warreconne  or elk
shed their horns  and is about thirty five yards wide  the island itself
is named carp island by evans  a former traveller  as we proceeded there
were great numbers of goats on the banks of the river  and we soon after
saw large flocks of them in the water  they had been gradually driven
into the river by the indians who now lined the shore so as to prevent
their escape  and were firing on them  while sometimes boys went into
the river and killed them with sticks  they seemed to be very
successful  for we counted fifty eight which they had killed  we
ourselves killed some  and then passing the lodges to which these
indians belonged  encamped at the distance of half a mile on the south 
having made fourteen and a half miles  we were soon visited by numbers
of these ricaras  who crossed the river hallooing and singing  two of
them then returned for some goats  flesh and buffaloe meat dried and
fresh  with which they made a feast that lasted till late at night  and
caused much music and merriment 

wednesday 17th  the weather was pleasant  we passed a low ground covered
with small timber on the south  and barren hills on the north which come
close to the river  the wind from the northwest then become so strong
that we could not move after ten o clock  until late in the afternoon 
when we were forced to use the towline  and we therefore made only six
miles  we all went out hunting and examining the country  the goats  of
which we see large flocks coming to the north bank of the river  spend
the summer  says mr  gravelines  in the plains east of the missouri  and
at the present season are returning to the black mountains  where they
subsist on leaves and shrubbery during the winter  and resume their
migrations in the spring  we also saw buffaloe  elk  and deer  and a
number of snakes  a beaver house too was seen  and we caught a
whippoorwill of a small and uncommon kind  the leaves are fast falling 
the river wider than usual and full of sandbars  and on the sides of the
hills are large stones  and some rock of a brownish colour in the
southern bend below us  our latitude by observation was 46 degrees 23 
57  

thursday 18  after three miles we reached the mouth of le boulet or
cannonball river  this stream rises in the black mountains  and falls
into the missouri on the south  its channel is about one hundred and
forty yards wide  though the water is now confined within forty  and its
name is derived from the numbers of perfectly round large stones on the
shore and in the bluffs just above  we here met with two frenchmen in
the employ of mr  gravelines  who had been robbed by the mandans of
their traps  furs  and other articles  and were descending the river in
a periogue  but they turned back with us in expectation of obtaining
redress through our means  at eight miles is a creek on the north  about
twenty eight yards wide  rising in the northeast  and called chewah or
fish river  one mile above this is another creek on the south  we
encamped on a sandbar to the south  at the distance of thirteen miles 
all of which we had made with oars and poles  great numbers of goats are
crossing the river and directing their course to the westward  we also
saw a herd of buffaloe and of elk  a pelican too was killed  and six
fallow deer  having found  as the ricaras informed us  that there are
none of the black tail species as high up as this place  the country is
in general level and fine  with broken short high grounds  low timbered
mounds on the river  and a rugged range of hills at a distance 

friday 19  we set sail with a fine morning  and a southeast wind  and at
two and a half miles passed a creek on the north side  at eleven and a
half miles we came to a lake or large pond on the same side  in which
were some swans  on both banks of the missouri are low grounds which
have much more timber than lower down the river  the hills are at one or
two miles distance from the banks  and the streams which rise in them
are brackish  and the mineral salts appear on the sides of the hills
and edges of the runs  in walking along the shore we counted fifty two
herds of buffaloe  and three of elk  at a single view  besides these we
also observed elk  deer  pelicans  and wolves  after seventeen and a
half miles we encamped on the north  opposite to the uppermost of a
number of round hills  forming a cone at the top  one being about
ninety  another sixty feet in height  and some of less elevation  our
chief tells us that the calumet bird lives in the holes formed by the
filtration of the water from the top of these hills through the sides 
near to one of these moles  on a point of a hill ninety feet above the
plain  are the remains of an old village which is high  strong  and has
been fortified  this our chief tells us is the remains of one of the
mandan villages  and are the first ruins which we have seen of that
nation in ascending the missouri  opposite to our camp is a deep bend to
the south  at the extremity of which is a pond 

saturday 30  we proceeded early with a southeast wind  which continued
high all day  and came to a creek on the north at two miles distance 
twenty yards wide  at eight miles we reached the lower point of an
island in the middle of the river  though there is no current on the
south  this island is covered with willows and extends about two miles 
there being a small creek coming in from the south at its lower
extremity  after making twelve miles we encamped on the south  at the
upper part of a bluff containing stone coal of an inferior quality 
immediately below this bluff and on the declivity of a hill  are the
remains of a village covering six or eight acres  formerly occupied by
the mandans  who  says our ricara chief  once lived in a number of
villages on each side of the river  till the sioux forced them forty
miles higher  whence after a few years residence  they moved to their
present position  the country through  which we passed has wider bottoms
and more timber than those we have been accustomed to see  the hills
rising at a distance and by gradual ascents  we have seen great numbers
of elk  deer  goats  and buffaloe  and the usual attendants of these
last  the wolves  who follow their movements and feed upon those who die
by accident  or who are too poor to keep pace with the herd  we also
wounded a white bear  and saw some fresh tracks of those animals which
are twice as large as the track of a man 

sunday 21  last night the weather was cold  the wind high from the
northeast  and the rain which fell froze on the ground  at daylight it
began to snow  and continued till the afternoon  when it remained cloudy
and the ground was covered with snow  we however  set out early  and
just above our camp came to a creek on the south  called chisshetaw 
about thirty yards wide and with a considerable quantity of water  our
ricara chief tells us  that at some distance up this river is situated a
large rock which is held in great veneration  and visited by parties who
go to consult it as to their own or their nations  destinies  all of
which they discern in some sort of figures or paintings with which it is
covered  about two miles off from the mouth of the river the party on
shore saw another of the objects of ricara superstition  it is a large
oak tree  standing alone in the open prairie  and as it alone has
withstood the fire which has consumed every thing around  the indians
naturally ascribe to it extraordinary powers  one of their ceremonies is
to make a hole in the skin of their necks through which a string is
passed and the other end tied to the body of the tree  and after
remaining in this way for some time they think they become braver  at
two miles a from our encampment we came to the ruins of a second mandan
village  which was in existence at the same time with that just
mentioned  it is situated on the north at the foot of a hill in a
beautiful and extensive plain  which is now covered with herds of
buffaloe  nearly opposite are remains of a third village on the south of
the missouri  and there is another also about two miles further on the
north  a little off the river  at the distance of seven miles we
encamped on the south  and spent a cold night  we procured to day a
buffaloe and an otter only  the river is wide and the sandbars numerous 
and a low island near our encampment 

monday 22  in the morning we passed an old mandan village on the south 
near our camp  at four miles another on the same side  about seven
o clock we came to at a camp of eleven sioux of the teton tribe  who are
almost perfectly naked  having only a piece of skin or cloth round the
middle  though we are suffering from the cold  from their appearance 
which is warlike  and from their giving two different accounts of
themselves  we believe that they are either going to or returning from
the mandans  to which nations the sioux frequently make excursions to
steal horses  as their conduct displeased as  we gave them nothing  at
six we reached an island about one mile in length  at the head of which
is a mandan village on the north in ruins  and two miles beyond a bad
sandbar  at eight miles are remains of another mandan village on the
south  and at twelve miles encamped on the south  the hunters brought in
a buffaloe bull  and mentioned that of about three hundred which they
had seen  there was not a single female  the beaver is here in plenty 
and the two frenchmen who are returning with us catch several every
night 

these villages which are nine in number are scattered along each side of
the river within a space of twenty miles  almost all that remains of
them is the wall which surrounded them  the fallen heaps of earth which
covered the houses  and occasionally human skulls and the teeth and
bones of men  and different animals  which are scattered on the surface
of the ground 

tuesday 23  the weather was cloudy and we had some snow  we soon arrived
at five lodges where the two frenchmen had been robbed  but the indians
had left it lately as we found the fires still burning  the country
consists as usual of timbered low grounds  with grapes  rushes  and
great quantities of a small red acid fruit  known among the indians by
a name signifying rabbitberries  and called by the french graisse de
buffle or buffaloe fat  the river too  is obstructed by many sandbars 
at twelve miles we passed an old village on the north  which was the
former residence of the ahnahaways who now live between the mandans and
minnetarees  after making thirteen miles we encamped on the south 

wednesday 24  the day was again dark and it snowed a little in the
morning  at three miles we came to a point on the south  where the river
by forcing a channel across a former bend has formed a large island on
the north  on this island we found one of the grand chiefs of the
mandans  who with five lodges was on a hunting excursion  he met his
enemy the ricara chief  with great ceremony and apparent cordiality  and
smoked with him  after visiting his lodges  the grand chief and his
brother came on board our boat for a short time  we then proceeded and
encamped on the north  at seven miles from our last night s station and
below the old village of the mandans and ricaras  here four mandans came
down from a camp above  and our ricara chief returned with them to their
camp  from which we auger favourably of their pacific views towards each
other  the land is low and beautiful  and covered with oak and
cottonwood  but has been too recently hunted to afford much game 

25th  the morning was cold and the wind gentle from the southeast  at
three miles we passed a handsome high prairie on the south  and on an
eminence about forty feet above the water and extending back for several
miles in a beautiful plain  was situated an old village of the mandan
nation which has been deserted for many years  a short distance above
it  on the continuation of the same rising ground are two old villages
of ricaras  one on the top of the hill  the other in the level plain 
which have been deserted only five years ago  above these villages is an
extensive low ground for several miles  in which are situated  at three
or four miles from the ricara villages  three old villages of mandans
near together  here the mandans lived when the ricaras came to them for
protection  and from this they moved to their present situation above 
in the low ground the squaws raised their corn  and the timber  of which
there was little near the villages  was supplied from the opposite side
of the river  where it was and still is abundant 

as we proceeded several parties of mandans both on foot and horseback
came along the river to view us  and were very desirous that we should
land and talk to them  this we could not do on account of the sandbreaks
on the shore  but we sent our ricara chief to them in a periogue  the
wind too having shifted to the southwest and being very high it required
all our precautions on board  for the river was full of sandbars which
made it very difficult to find the channel  we got aground several
times  and passed a very bad point of rocks  after which we encamped on
a sandpoint to the north  above a handsome plain covered with timber 
and opposite to a high hill on the south side at the distance of eleven
miles  here we were joined by our ricara chief  who brought an indian to
the camp where he remained all night 

26th  we set out early with a southwest wind  and after putting the
ricara chief on shore to join the mandans who were in great numbers
along it  we proceeded to the camp of the grand chiefs four miles
distant  here we met a mr  m cracken one of the northwest or hudson bay
company  who arrived with another person about nine days ago to trade
for horses and buffaloe robes  two of the chiefs came on board with some
of their household furniture  such as earthern pots and a little corn
and went on with us  the rest of the indians following on shore  at one
mile beyond the camp we passed a small creek  and at three more a bluff
of coal of an inferior quality on the south  after making eleven miles
we reached an old field where the mandans had cultivated grain last
summer  and encamped for the night on the south side  about half a mile
below the first village of the mandans  in the morning we had a willow
low ground on the south and highland on the north  which occasionally
varied in the course of the day  there is but little wood on this part
of the river  which is here subdivided into many channels and obstructed
by sandbars  as soon as we arrived a crowd of men  women  and children
came down to see us  captain lewis returned with the principal chiefs to
the village  while the others remained with us during the evening  the
object which seemed to surprise them most  was a cornmill fixed to the
boat which we had occasion to use  and delighted them by the ease with
which it reduced the grain to powder  among others who visited us was
the son of the grand chief of the mandans  who had his two little
fingers cut off at the second joints  on inquiring into this accident 
we found that it was customary to express grief for the death of
relations by some corporeal suffering  and that the usual mode was to
lose two joints of the little fingers  or sometimes the other fingers 
the wind blew very cold in the evening from the southwest  two of the
party are affected with rheumatic complaints 




                                chapter v 

     council held with the mandans  a prairie on fire  and a singular
     instance of preservation  peace established between the mandans and
     ricaras  the party encamp for the winter  indian mode of catching
     goats  beautiful appearance of northern lights  friendly character
     of the indians  some account of the mandans  the ahnahaways and the
     minnetarees  the party acquire the confidence of the mandans by
     taking part in their controversy with the sioux  religion of the
     mandans  and their singular conception of the term medicine  their
     tradition  the sufferings of the party from the severity of the
     season  indian game of billiards described  character of the
     missouri  of the surrounding country  and of the rivers  creeks 
     islands   c 


saturday  october 27  at an early hour we proceeded and anchored off the
village  captain clarke went on shore  and after smoking a pipe with the
chiefs  was desired to remain and eat with them  he declined on account
of his being unwell  but his refusal gave great offence to the indians 
who considered it disrespectful not to eat when invited  till the cause
was explained to their satisfaction  we sent them some tobacco  and then
proceeded to the second village on the north  passing by a bank
containing coal  and a second village  and encamped at four miles on the
north  opposite to a village of ahnahaways  we here met with a
frenchman  named jesseaume  who lives among the indians with his wife
and children  and who we take as an interpreter  the indians had flocked
to the bank to see us as we passed  and they visited in great numbers
the camp  where some of them remained all night  we sent in the evening
three young indians with a present of tobacco for the chiefs of the
three upper villages  inviting them to come down in the morning to a
council with us  accordingly the next day 

sunday  october 28  we were joined by many of the minnetarees and
ahnahaways from above  but the wind was so violent from the southwest
that the chiefs of the lower villages could not come up  and the
council was deferred till to morrow  in the mean while we entertained
our visitors by showing them what was new to them in the boat  all
which  as well our black servant  they called great medicine  the
meaning of which we afterwards learnt  we also consulted the grand chief
of the mandans  black cat  and mr  jesseaume  as to the names 
characters   c  of the chiefs with whom we are to hold the council  in
the course of the day we received several presents from the women 
consisting of corn  boiled hominy  and garden stuffs  in our turn we
gratified the wife of the great chief with a gift of a glazed earthen
jar  our hunter brought us two beaver  in the afternoon we sent the
minnetaree chiefs to smoke for us with the great chief of the mandans 
and told them we would speak in the morning 

finding that we shall be obliged to pass the winter at this place  we
went up the river about one and a half miles to day  with a view of
finding a convenient spot for a fort  but the timber was too scarce and
small for our purposes 

monday  october 29  the morning was fine and we prepared our presents
and speech for the council  after breakfast we were visited by an old
chief of the ahnahaways  who finding himself growing old and weak had
transferred his power to his son  who is now at war against the
shoshonees  at ten o clock the chiefs were all assembled under an awning
of our sails  stretched so as to exclude the wind which had become high 
that the impression might be the more forcible  the men were all
paraded  and the council opened by a discharge from the swivel of the
boat  we then delivered a speech  which like those we had already made
intermingled advice with assurances of friendship and trade  while we
were speaking the old ahnahaway chief grew very restless  and observed
that he could not wait long as his camp was exposed to the hostilities
of the shoshonees  he was instantly rebuked with great dignity by one of
the chiefs for this violation of decorum at such a moment  and remained
quiet during the rest of the council  towards the end of our speech we
introduced the subject of our ricara chief  with whom we recommended a
firm peace  to this they seemed well disposed  and all smoked with him
very amicably  we all mentioned the goods which had been taken from the
frenchmen  and expressed a wish that they should he restored  this being
over  we proceeded to distribute the presents with great ceremony  one
chief of each town was acknowledged by a gift of a flag  a medal with
the likeness of the president of the united states  a uniform coat  hat
and feather  to the second chiefs we gave a medal representing some
domestic animals  and a loom for weaving  to the third chiefs medals
with the impressions of a farmer sowing grain  a variety of other
presents were distributed  but none seemed to give them more
satisfaction than an iron corn mill which we gave to the mandans 

the chiefs who were made to day are  shahaka or big white  a first
chief  and kagohami or little raven  a second chief of the lower village
of the mandans  called matootonha  the other chiefs of an inferior
quality who were recommended were  1  ohheenaw  or big man  a chayenne
taken prisoner by the mandans who adopted him  and he now enjoys great
consideration among the tribe  2  shotahawrora  or coal  of the second
mandan village which is called rooptahee  we made poscopsahe  or black
cat  the first chief of the village  and the grand chief of the whole
mandan nation  his second chief is kagonomokshe  or raven man chief 
inferior chiefs of this village were  tawnuheo  and bellahsara  of which
we did not learn the translation 

in the third village which is called mahawha  and where the arwacahwas
reside  we made one first chief  tetuckopinreha  or white buffaloe robe
unfolded  and recognized two of an inferior order  minnissurraree  or
neighing horse  and locongotiha  or old woman at a distance 

of the fourth village where the minnetarees live  and which is called
metaharta  we made a first chief  ompsehara  or black moccasin  a second
chief  ohhaw  or little fox  other distinguished chiefs of this village
were  mahnotah  or big thief  a man whom we did not see as he is out
fighting  and was killed soon after  and mahserassa  or tail of the
calumet bird  in the fifth village we made a first chief eapanopa  or
red shield  a second chief wankerassa  or two tailed calumet bird  both
young chiefs  other persons of distinction are  shahakohopinnee  or
little wolf s medicine  ahrattanamoekshe  or wolfman chief  who is now
at war  and is the son of the old chief we have mentioned  whose name is
caltahcota  or cherry on a bush 

the presents intended for the grand chief of the minnetarees  who was
not at the council  were sent to him by the old chief caltahcota  and we
delivered to a young chief those intended for the chief of the lower
village  the council was concluded by a shot from our swivel  and after
firing the airgun for their amusement  they retired to deliberate on the
answer which they are to give to morrow 

in the evening the prairie took fire  either by accident or design  and
burned with great fury  the whole plain being enveloped in flames  so
rapid was its progress that a man and a woman were burnt to death before
they could reach a place of safety  another man with his wife and child
were much burnt  and several other persons narrowly escaped destruction 
among the rest a boy of the half white breed escaped unhurt in the midst
of the flames  his safety was ascribed to the great medicine spirit  who
had preserved him on account of his being white  but a much more natural
cause was the presence of mind of his mother  who seeing no hopes of
carrying off her son  threw him on the ground  and covering him with the
fresh hide of a buffaloe  escaped herself from the flames  as soon as
the fire had passed  she returned and found him untouched  the skin
having prevented  the flame from reaching the grass on which he lay 

tuesday 30  we were this morning visited by two persons from the lower
village  one the big white the chief of the village  the other the
chayenne called the big man  they had been hunting  and did not return
yesterday early enough to attend the council  at their request we
repeated part of our speech of yesterday  and put the medal round the
neck of the chief  captain clarke took a periogue and went up the river
in search of a good wintering place  and returned after going seven
miles to the lower point of an island on the north side  about one mile
in length  he found the banks on the north side high  with coal
occasionally  and the country fine on all sides  but the want of wood
and the scarcity of game up the river  induced us to decide on fixing
ourselves lower down during the winter  in the evening our men danced
among themselves to the great amusement of the indians 

wednesday 31  a second chief arrived this morning with an invitation
from the grand chief of the mandans  to come to his village where he
wished to present some corn to us and to speak with us  captain clarke
walked down to his village  he was first seated with great ceremony on a
robe by the side of the chief  who then threw over his shoulders another
robe handsomely ornamented  the pipe was then smoked with several of the
old men who were seated around the chief  after some time he began his
discourse  by observing that he believed what we had told him  and that
they should soon enjoy peace  which would gratify him as well as his
people  because they could then hunt without fear of being attacked  and
the women might work in the fields without looking every moment for the
enemy  and at night put off their moccasins  a phrase by which is
conveyed the idea of security when the women could undress at night
without fear of attack  as to the ricaras  he continued  in order to
show you that we wish peace with all men  that chief  pointing to his
second chief  will go with some warriors back to the ricaras with their
chief now here and smoke with that nation  when we heard of your coming
all the nations around returned from their hunting to see you  in hopes
of receiving large presents  all are disappointed and some discontented 
for his part he was not much so  though his village was  he added that
he would go and see his great father the president  two of the steel
traps stolen from the frenchmen were then laid before captain clarke 
and the women brought about twelve bushels of corn  after the chief had
finished  captain clarke made an answer to the speech and then returned
to the boat  where he found the chief of the third village and kagohami
 the little raven  who smoked and talked about an hour  after they left
the boat the grand chief of the mandans came dressed in the clothes we
had given him  with his two children  and begged to see the men dance 
in which they willingly gratified him 

thursday  november 1st  mr  m cracken  the trader whom we found here 
set out to day on his return to the british fort and factory on the
assiniboin river  about one hundred and fifty miles from this place  he
took a letter from captain lewis to the northwest company  inclosing a
copy of the passport granted by the british minister in the united
states  at ten o clock the chiefs of the lower village arrived  they
requested that we would call at their village for some corn  that they
were willing to make peace with the ricaras  that they had never
provoked the war between them  but as the ricaras had killed some of
their chiefs  they had retaliated on them  that they had killed them
like birds  till they were tired of killing them  so that they would
send a chief and some warriors to smoke with them  in the evening we
dropped down to the lower village where captain lewis went on shore  and
captain clarke proceeded to a point of wood on the north side 

friday  november 2  he therefore went up to the village where eleven
bushels of corn were presented to him  in the meantime captain clarke
went down with the boats three miles  and having found a good position
where there was plenty of timber  encamped and began to fell trees to
build our huts  our ricara chief set out with one mandan chief and
several minnetaree and mandan warriors  the wind was from the southeast 
and the weather being fine a crowd of indians came down to visit us 

saturday 3  we now began the building of our cabins  and the frenchmen
who are to return to st  louis are building a periogue for the purpose 
we sent six men in a periogue to hunt down the river  we were also
fortunate enough to engage in our service a canadian frenchmen  who had
been with the chayenne indians on the black mountains  and last summer
descended thence by the little missouri  mr  jessaume our interpreter
also came down with his squaw and children to live at our camp  in the
evening we received a visit from kagohami or little raven  whose wife
accompanied him  bringing about sixty weight of dried meat  a robe and a
pot of meal  we gave him in return a piece of tobacco  to his wife an
axe and a few small articles  and both of them spent the night at our
camp  two beavers were caught in traps this morning 

sunday 4  we continued our labours  the timber which we employ is large
and heavy  and chiefly consists of cottonwood and elm with some ash of
an inferior size  great numbers of the indians pass our camp on their
hunting excursions  the day was clear and pleasant  but last night was
very cold and there was a white frost 

monday 5  the indians are all out on their hunting parties  a camp of
mandans caught within two days one hundred goats a short distance below
us  their mode of hunting them is to form a large strong pen or fold 
from which a fence made of bushes gradually widens on each side  the
animals are surrounded by the hunters and gently driven towards this
pen  in which they imperceptibly find themselves inclosed and are then
at the mercy of the hunters  the weather is cloudy and the wind moderate
from the northwest  late at night we were awaked by the sergeant on
guard to see the beautiful phenomenon called the northern light  along
the northern sky was a large space occupied by a light of a pale but
brilliant white colour  which rising from the horizon extended itself to
nearly twenty degrees above it  after glittering for some time its
colours would be overcast  and almost obscured  but again it would burst
out with renewed beauty  the uniform colour was pale light  but its
shapes were various and fantastic  at times the sky was lined with light
coloured streaks rising perpendicularly from the horizon  and gradually
expanding into a body of light in which we could trace the floating
columns sometimes advancing  sometimes retreating and shaping into
infinite forms  the space in which they moved  it all faded away before
the morning  at daylight 

tuesday 6  the clouds to the north were darkening and the wind rose high
from the northwest at eight o clock  and continued cold during the day 
mr  gravelines and four others who came with us returned to the ricaras
in a small periogue  we gave him directions to accompany some of the
ricara chiefs to the seat of government in the spring 

wednesday 7  the day was temperate but cloudy and foggy  and we were
enabled to go on with our work with much expedition 

thursday 8  the morning again cloudy  our huts advance very well  and we
are visited by numbers of indians who come to let their horses graze
near us  in the day the horses are let loose in quest of grass  in the
night they are collected and receive an armful of small boughs of the
cottonwood  which being very juicy  soft and brittle  form nutritious
and agreeable food  the frost this morning was very severe  the weather
during the day cloudy and the wind from the northwest  we procured from
an indian a weasel perfectly white except the extremity of the tail
which was black  great numbers of wild geese are passing to the south 
but their flight is too high for us to procure any of them 

november 10  we had again a raw day  a northwest wind  but rose early
in hopes of finishing our works before the extreme cold begins  a chief
who is a half pawnee came to us and brought a present of half a
buffaloe  in return for which we gave him some small presents and a few
articles to his wife and son  he then crossed the river in a buffaloe
skin canoe  his wife took the boat on her back and carried it to the
village three miles off  large flocks of geese and brant  and also a few
ducks are passing towards the south 

sunday 11  the weather is cold  we received the visit of two squaws 
prisoners from the rock mountains  and purchased by chaboneau  the
mandans at this time are out hunting the buffaloe 

monday 12  the last night had been cold and this morning we had a very
hard frost  the wind changeable during the day  and some ice appears on
the edges of the rivers  swans too are passing to the south  the big
white came down to us  having packed on the back of his squaw about one
hundred pounds of very fine meat  for which we gave him as well as the
squaw some presents  particularly an axe to the woman with which she was
very much pleased 

tuesday 13  we this morning unloaded the boat and stowed away the
contents in a storehouse which we have built  at half past ten ice began
to float down the river for the first time  in the course of the morning
we were visited by the black cat  poscapsahe  who brought an assiniboin
chief and seven warriors to see us  this man  whose name is chechawk  is
a chief of one out of three bands of assiniboins who wander over the
plains between the missouri and assiniboin during the summer  and in the
winter carry the spoils of their hunting to the traders on the
assiniboin river  and occasionally come to this place  the whole three
bands consist of about eight hundred men  we gave him a twist of tobacco
to smoke with his people  and a gold cord for himself  the sioux also
asked for whiskey which we refused to give them  it snowed all day and
the air was very cold 

wednesday 14  the river rose last night half an inch  and is now filled
with floating ice  this morning was cloudy with some snow  about seventy
lodges of assiniboins and some knistenaux are at the mandan village  and
this being the day of adoption and exchange of property between them
all  it is accompanied by a dance  which prevents our seeing more than
two indians to day  these knistenaux are a band of chippeways whose
language they speak  they live on the assiniboin and saskashawan rivers 
and are about two hundred and forty men  we sent a man down on horseback
to see what had become of our hunters  and as we apprehend a failure of
provisions we have recourse to our pork this evening  two frenchmen who
had been below returned with twenty beaver which they had caught in
traps 

thursday 15  the morning again cloudy  and the ice running thicker than
yesterday  the wind variable  the man came back with information that
our hunters were about thirty miles below  and we immediately sent an
order to them to make their way through the floating ice  to assist them
in which we sent some tin for the bow of the periogue and a towrope  the
ceremony of yesterday seem to continue still  for we were not visited by
a single indian  the swan are still passing to the south 

friday 16  we had a very hard white frost this morning  the trees are
all covered with ice  and the weather cloudy  the men this day moved
into the huts  although they are not finished  in the evening some
horses were sent down to the woods near us in order to prevent their
being stolen by the assiniboins  with whom some difficulty is now
apprehended  an indian came down with four buffaloe robes and some corn 
which he offered for a pistol  but was refused 

saturday  november 17  last night was very cold  and the ice in the
river to day is thicker than hitherto  we are totally occupied with our
huts  but received visits from several indians 

sunday  november 18  to day we had a cold windy morning  the black cat
came to see us  and occupied us for a long time with questions on the
usages of our country  he mentioned that a council had been held
yesterday to deliberate on the state of their affairs  it seems that not
long ago  a party of sioux fell in with some horses belonging to the
minnetarees  and carried them off  but in their flight they were met by
some assiniboins  who killed the sioux and kept the horses  a frenchman
too who had lived many years among the mandans  was lately killed on his
route to the british factory on the assiniboin  some smaller differences
existed between the two nations  all of which being discussed  the
council decided that they would not resent the recent insults from the
assiniboins and knistenaux  until they had seen whether we had deceived
them or not in our promises of furnishing them with arms and ammunition 
they had been disappointed in their hopes of receiving them from mr 
evans and were afraid that we too  like him  might tell them what was
not true  we advised them to continue at peace  that supplies of every
kind would no doubt arrive for them  but that time was necessary to
organize the trade  the fact is that the assiniboins treat the mandans
as the sioux do the ricaras  by their vicinity to the british they get
all the supplies  which they withhold or give at pleasure to the remoter
indians  the consequence is  that however badly treated  the mandans and
ricaras are very slow to retaliate lest they should  lose their trade
altogether 

monday 19  the ice continues to float in the river  the wind high from
the northwest  and the weather cold  our hunters arrived from their
excursion below  and bring a very fine supply of thirty two deer  eleven
elk  and five buffaloe  all of which was hung in a smokehouse 

tuesday 20  we this day moved into our huts which are now completed 
this place which we call fort mandan  is situated in a point of low
ground  on the north side of the missouri  covered with tall and heavy
cottonwood  the works consist of two rows of huts or sheds  forming an
angle where they joined each other  each row containing four rooms  of
fourteen feet square and seven feet high  with plank ceiling   and the
roof slanting so as to form a loft above the rooms  the highest part of
which is eighteen feet from the ground  the backs of the huts formed a
wall of that height  and opposite the angle the place of the wall was
supplied by picketing  in the area were two rooms for stores and
provisions  the latitude by observation is 47 degrees 21  47   and the
computed distance from the mouth of the missouri sixteen hundred miles 

in the course of the day several indians came down to partake of our
fresh meat  among the rest  three chiefs of the second mandan village 
they inform us that the sioux on the missouri above the chayenne river 
threaten to attack them this winter  that these sioux are much irritated
at the ricaras for having made peace through our means with the mandans 
and have lately ill treated three ricaras who carried the pipe of peace
to them  by beating them and taking away their horses  we gave them
assurances that we would protect them from all their enemies 

november 21st  the weather was this day fine  the river clear of ice and
rising a little  we are now settled in our new winter habitation  and
shall wait with much anxiety the first return of spring to continue our
journey 

the villages near which we are established are five in number  and are
the residence of three distinct nations  the mandans  the ahnahaways 
and the minnetarees  the history of the mandans  as we received it from
our interpreters and from the chiefs themselves  and as it is attested
by existing monuments  illustrates more than that of any other nation
the unsteady movements and the tottering fortunes of the american
nations  within the recollection of living witnesses  the mandans were
settled forty years ago in nine villages  the ruins of which we passed
about eighty miles below  and situated seven on the west and two on the
east side of the missouri  the two finding themselves wasting away
before the small pox and the sioux  united into one village  and moved
up the river opposite to the ricaras  the same causes reduced the
remaining seven to five villages  till at length they emigrated in a
body to the ricara nation  where they formed themselves into two
villages  and joined those of their countrymen who had gone before them 
in their new residence they were still insecure  and at length the three
villages ascended the missouri to their present position  the two who
had emigrated together still settled in the two villages on the
northwest side of the missouri  while the single village took a position
on the southeast side  in this situation they were found by those who
visited them in 1796  since which the two villages have united into one 
they are now in two villages  one on the southeast of the missouri  the
other on the opposite side  and at the distance of three miles across 
the first  in an open plain  contains about forty or fifty lodges  built
in the same way as those of the ricaras  the second  the same number 
and both may raise about three hundred and fifty men 

on the same side of the river  and at the distance of four miles from
the lower mandan village  is another called mahaha  it is situated in a
high plain at the mouth of knife river  and is the residence of the
ahnahaways  this nation  whose name indicates that they were  people
whose village is on a hill   formerly resided on the missouri  about
thirty miles below where they now live  the assiniboins and sioux forced
them to a spot five miles higher  where the greatest part of them were
put to death  and the rest emigrated to their present situation  in
order to obtain an assylum near the minnetarees  they are called by the
french  soulier noir or shoe indians  by the mandans  wattasoons  and
their whole force is about fifty men 

on the south side of the same knife river  half a mile above the mahaha
and in the same open plain with it  is a village of minnetarees surnamed
metaharta  who are about one hundred and fifty men in number  on the
opposite side of knife river  and one and a half mile above this village
is a second of minnetarees  who may be considered as the proper
minnetaree nation  it is situated in a beautiful low plain  and contains
four hundred and fifty warriors  the accounts which we received of the
minnetarees were contradictory  the mandans say that this people came
out of the water to the east  and settled near them in their former
establishment in nine villages  that they were very numerous  and fixed
themselves in one village on the southern side of the missouri  a
quarrel about a buffaloe divided the nation  of which two bands went
into the plains  and were known by the name of crow and paunch indians 
and the rest moved to their present establishment  the minnetarees
proper assert  on the contrary  that they grew where they now live  and
will never emigrate from the spot  the great spirit having declared that
if they moved they would all die  they also say that the minnetarees
metaharta  that is minnetarees of the willows  whose language with very
little variation is their own  came many years ago from the plains and
settled near them  and perhaps the two traditions may be reconciled by
the natural presumption that these minnetarees were the tribe known to
the mandans below  and that they ascended the river for the purpose of
rejoining the minnetarees proper  these minnetarees are part of the
great nation called fall indians  who occupy the intermediate country
between the missouri and the saskaskawan  and who are known by the name
of minnetarees of the missouri  and minnetarees of fort de prairie  that
is  residing near or rather frequenting the establishment in the prairie
on the saskaskawan  these minnetarees indeed  told us that they had
relations on the saskaskawan  whom they had never known till they met
them in war  and having engaged in the night were astonished at
discovering that they were fighting with men who spoke their own
language  the name of grosventres  or bigbellies is given to these
minnetarees  as well as to all the fall indians  the inhabitants of
these five villages  all of which are within the distance of six miles 
live in harmony with each other  the ahnahaways understand in part the
language of the minnetarees  the dialect of the mandans differs widely
from both  but their long residence together has insensibly blended
their manners  and occasioned some approximation in language 
particularly as to objects of daily occurrence and obvious to the
senses 

november 22  the morning was fine  and the day warm  we purchased from
the mandans a quantity of corn of a mixed colour  which they dug up in
ears from holes made near the front of their lodges  in which it is
buried during the winter  this morning the sentinel informed us that an
indian was about to kill his wife near the fort  we went down to the
house of our interpreter where we found the parties  and after
forbidding any violence  inquired into the cause of his intending to
commit such as atrocity  it appeared that some days ago a quarrel had
taken place between him and his wife  in consequence of which she had
taken refuge in the house where the two squaws of our interpreter lived 
by running away she forfeited her life  which might have been lawfully
taken by the husband  about two days ago she had returned to the
village  but the same evening came back to the fort much beaten and
stabbed in three places  and the husband now came for the purpose of
completing his revenge  he observed that he had lent her to one of our
serjeants for a night  and that if he wanted her he would give her to
him altogether  we gave him a few presents and tried to persuade him to
take his wife home  the grand chief too happened to arrive at the same
moment  and reproached him with his violence  till at length they went
off together  but by no means in a state of much apparent love 

november 23  again we had a fair and warm day  with the wind from the
southeast  the river is now at a stand having risen four inches in the
whole 

november 24  the wind continued from the same quarter and the weather
was warm  we were occupied in finishing our huts and making a large rope
of elk skin to draw our boat on the bank 

sunday  november 25  the weather is still fine  warm and pleasant  and
the river falls one inch and a half  captain lewis went on an excursion
to the villages accompanied by eight men  a minnetaree chief  the first
who has visited us  came down to the fort  his name was waukerassa  but
as both the interpreters had gone with captain lewis we were obliged to
confine our civilities to some presents with which he was much pleased 
we now completed our huts  and fortunately too  for the next day 

monday  november 26  before daylight the wind shifted to the northwest 
and blew very hard  with cloudy weather and a keen cold air  which
confined us much and prevented us from working  the night continued very
cold  and 

tuesday 27  the weather cloudy  the wind continuing from the northwest
and the river crowded with floating ice  captain lewis returned with two
chiefs mahnotah  an ahnahaway  and minnessurraree a minnetaree  and a
third warrior  they explained to us that the reason of their not having
come to see us  was that the mandans had told them that we meant to
combine with the sioux and cut them off in the course of the winter  a
suspicion increased by the strength of the fort  and the circumstance of
our interpreters having both removed there with their families  these
reports we did not fail to disprove to their entire satisfaction  and
amused them by every attention  particularly by the dancing of the men
which diverted them highly  all the indians whom captain lewis had
visited were very well disposed  and received him with great kindness 
except a principal chief of one of the upper villages  named
mabpahpaparapassatoo or horned weasel  who made use of the civilized
indecorum of refusing to be seen  and when captain lewis called he was
told the chief was not at home  in the course of the day seven of the
northwest company s traders arrived from the assiniboin river  and one
of their interpreters having undertaken to circulate among the indians
unfavourable reports  it become necessary to warn them of the
consequences if they did not desist from such proceedings  the river
fell two inches to day and the weather became very cold 

wednesday 28  about eight o clock last evening it began to snow and
continued till daybreak  after which it ceased till seven o clock  but
then resumed and continued during the day  the weather being cold and
the river full of floating ice  about eight o clock poscopsahe came down
to visit us  with some warriors  we gave them presents and entertained
them with all that might amuse their curiosity  and at parting we told
them that we had heard of the british trader  mr  laroche  having
attempted to distribute medals and flags among them  but that those
emblems could not be received from any other than the american nation
without incurring the displeasure of their great father the president 
they left us much pleased with their treatment  the river fell one inch
to day 

thursday 29  the wind is again from the northwest  the weather cold  and
the snow which fell yesterday and this night is thirteen inches in
depth  the river closed during the night at the village above  and fell
two feet  but this afternoon it began to rise a little  mr  laroche  the
principal of the seven traders  came with one of his men to see us  we
told him that we should not permit him to give medals and flags to the
indians  he declared that he had no such intention  and we then suffered
him to make use of one of our interpreters  on his stipulating not to
touch any subject but that of his traffic with them  an unfortunate
accident occurred to sergeant pryor  who in taking down the boat s mast
dislocated his shoulder  nor was it till after four trials that we
replaced it 

friday 30  about eight o clock an indian came to the opposite bank of
the river  calling out that he had something important to communicate 
and on sending for him  he told us that five mandans had been met about
eight leagues to the southwest by a party of sioux  who had killed one
of them  wounded two  and taken nine horses  that four of the wattasoons
were missing  and that the mandans expected an attack  we thought this
an excellent opportunity to discountenance the injurious reports against
us  and to fix the wavering confidence of the nation  captain clarke
therefore instantly crossed the river with twenty three men strongly
armed  and circling the town approached it from behind  his unexpected
appearance surprised and alarmed the chiefs  who came out to meet him 
and conducted him to the village  he then told them that having heard of
the outrage just committed  he had come to assist his dutiful children 
that if they would assemble their warriors and those of the nation  he
would lead them against the sioux and avenge the blood of their
countrymen  after some minutes conversation  oheenaw the chayenne arose 
 we now see   said he   that what you have told us is true  since as
soon as our enemies threaten to attack us you come to protect us and are
ready to chastise those who have spilt our blood  we did indeed listen
to your good talk  for when you told us that the other nations were
inclined to peace with us  we went out carelessly in small parties  and
some have been killed by the sioux and ricaras  but i knew that the
ricaras were liars  and i told their chief who accompanied you  that his
whole nation were liars and bad men  that we had several times made a
peace with them which they were the first to break  that whenever we
pleased we might shoot them like buffaloe  but that we had no wish to
kill them  that we would not suffer them to kill us  nor steal our
horses  and that although we agreed to make peace with them  because our
two fathers desired it  yet we did not believe that they would be
faithful long  such  father  was my language to them in your presence 
and you see that instead of listening to your good counsels they have
spilt our blood  a few days ago two ricaras came here and told us that
two of their villages were making moccasins  that the sioux were
stirring them up against us  and that we ought to take care of our
horses  yet these very ricaras we sent home as soon as the news reached
us to day  lest our people should kill them in the first moment of grief
for their murdered relatives  four of the wattasoons whom we expected
back in sixteen days have been absent twenty four  and we fear have
fallen  but father the snow is now deep  the weather cold  and our
horses cannot travel through the plains  the murderers have gone off  if
you will conduct us in the spring  when the snow has disappeared  we
will assemble all the surrounding warriors and follow you  

captain clarke replied that we were always willing and able to defend
them  that he was sorry that the snow prevented their marching to meet
the sioux  since he wished to show them that the warriors of their great
father would chastise the enemies of his obedient children who opened
their ears to his advice  that if some ricaras had joined the sioux 
they should remember that there were bad men in every nation  and that
they should not be offended at the ricaras till they saw whether these
ill disposed men were countenanced by the whole tribe  that the sioux
possessed great influence over the ricaras  whom they supplied with
military stores  and sometimes led them astray  because they were afraid
to oppose them  but that this should be the less offensive since the
mandans themselves were under the same apprehensions from the
assiniboins and knistenaux  and that while they were thus dependant 
both the ricaras and mandans ought to keep on terms with their powerful
neighbours  whom they may afterwards set at defiance  when we shall
supply them with arms  and take them under our protection 

after two hours conversation captain clarke left the village  the chief
repeatedly thanked him for the fatherly protection he had given them 
observing that the whole village had been weeping all night and day for
the brave young man who had been slain  but now they would wipe their
eyes and weep no more as they saw that their father would protect them 
he then crossed the river on the ice and returned on the north side to
the fort  the day as well as the evening was cold  and the river rose to
its former height 

saturday  december 1  the wind was from the northwest  and the whole
party engaged in picketing the fort  about ten o clock the half brother
of the man who had been killed  came to inform us that six sharhas or
chayenne indians had arrived  bringing a pipe of peace  and that their
nation was three days march behind them  three pawnees had accompanied
the sharhas  and the mandans being afraid of the sharhas on account of
their being at peace with the sioux  wished to put both them and the
three pawnees to death  but the chiefs had forbidden it as it would be
contrary to our wishes  we gave him a present of tobacco  and although
from his connexion with the sufferer  he was more embittered against the
pawnees than any other mandan  yet he seemed perfectly satisfied with
our pacific counsels and advice  the mandans  we observe  call all the
ricaras by the name of pawnees  the name of ricaras being that by which
the nation distinguishes itself 

in the evening we were visited by a mr  henderson  who came from the
hudson bay company to trade with the minnetarees  he had been about
eight days on his route in a direction nearly south  and brought with
him tobacco  beeds  and other merchandize to trade for furs  and a few
guns which are to be exchanged for horses 

sunday  december 2  the latter part of the evening was warm  and a thaw
continued till the morning  when the wind shifted to the north  at
eleven o clock the chiefs of the lower village brought down four of the
sharhas  we explained to them our intentions  and advised them to remain
at peace with each other  we also gave them a flag  some tobacco  and a
speech for their nation  these were accompanied by a letter to messrs 
tabeau and gravelines at the ricara village  requesting them to preserve
peace if possible  and to declare the part which we should be forced to
take if the ricaras and sioux made war on those whom we had adopted 
after distributing a few presents to the sharhas and mandans  and
showing them our curiosities we dismissed them  apparently well pleased
at their reception 

monday  december 3  the morning was fine  but in the afternoon the
weather became cold with the wind from the northwest  the father of the
mandan who was killed brought us a present of dried pumpkins and some
pemitigon  for which we gave him some small articles  our offer of
assistance to avenge the death of his son seemed to have produced a
grateful respect from him  as well as from the brother of the deceased 
which pleased us much 

tuesday 4th  the wind continues from the northwest  the weather cloudy
and raw  and the river rose one inch  oscapsahe and two young chiefs
pass the day with us  the whole religion of the mandans consists in the
belief of one great spirit presiding over their destinies  this being
must be in the nature of a good genius since it is associated with the
healing art  and the great spirit is synonymous with great medicine  a
name also applied to every thing which they do not comprehend  each
individual selects for himself the particular object of his devotion 
which is termed his medicine  and is either some invisible being or more
commonly some animal  which thenceforward becomes his protector or his
intercessor with the great spirit  to propitiate whom every attention is
lavished  and every personal consideration is sacrificed   i was lately
owner of seventeen horses   said a mandan to us one day   but i have
offered them all up to my medicine and am now poor   he had in reality
taken all his wealth  his horses  into the plain  and turning them loose
committed them to the care of his medicine and abandoned them forever 
the horses less religious took care of themselves  and the pious votary
travelled home on foot  their belief in a future state is connected with
this tradition of their origin  the whole nation resided in one large
village under ground near a subterraneous lake  a grape vine extended
its roots down to their habitation and gave them a view of the light 
some of the most adventurous climed up the vine and were delighted with
the sight of the earth  which they found covered with buffaloe and rich
with every kind of fruits  returning with the grapes they had gathered 
their countrymen were so pleased with the taste of them that the whole
nation resolved to leave their dull residence for the charms of the
upper region  men  women and children ascended by means of the vine  but
when about half the nation had reached the surface of the earth  a
corpulent woman who was clambering up the vine broke it with her weight 
and closed upon herself and the rest of the nation the light of the sun 
those who were left on earth made a village below where we saw the nine
villages  and when the mandans die they expect to return to the original
seats of their forefathers  the good reaching the ancient village by
means of the lake  which the burden of the sins of the wicked will not
enable them to cross 

wednesday 5  the morning was cold and disagreeable  the wind from the
southeast accompanied with snow  in the evening there was snow again and
the wind shifted to the northeast  we were visited by several indians
with a present of pumpkins  and by two of the traders of the northwest
company 

thursday 6  the wind was violent from the north northwest with some
snow  the air keen and cold  at eight o clock a m  the thermometer stood
at ten degrees above 0  and the river rose an inch and a half in the
course of the day 

friday  december 7  the wind still continued from the northwest and the
day is very cold  shahaka the chief of the lower village came to apprise
us that the buffaloe were near  and that his people were waiting for us
to join them in the chase  captain clark with fifteen men went out and
found the indians engaged in killing the buffaloe  the hunters mounted
on horseback and armed with bows and arrows encircle the herd  and
gradually drive them into a plain or an open place fit for the movements
of horse  they then ride in among them  and singling out a buffaloe  a
female being preferred  go as close as possible and wound her with
arrows till they think they have given the mortal stroke  when they
pursue another till the quiver is exhausted  if  which rarely happens 
the wounded buffaloe attacks the hunter  he evades his blow by the
agility of his horse which is trained for the combat with great
dexterity  when they have killed the requisite number they collect their
game  and the squaws and attendants come up from the rear and skin and
dress the animals  captain clarke killed ten buffaloe  of which five
only were brought to the fort  the rest which could not be conveyed home
being seized by the indians  among whom the custom is that whenever a
buffaloe is found dead without an arrow or any particular mark  he is
the property of the finder  so that often a hunter secures scarcely any
of the game he kills if the arrow happens to fall off  whatever is left
out at night falls to the share of the wolves  who are the constant and
numerous attendants of the buffaloe  the river closed opposite the fort
last night  an inch and a half in thickness  in the morning the
thermometer stood at one degree below 0  three men were badly
frostbitten in consequence of their exposure 

saturday 8  the thermometer stood at twelve degrees below 0  that is at
forty two degrees below the freezing point  the wind was from the
northwest  captain lewis with fifteen men went out to hunt the buffaloe 
great numbers of which darkened the prairies for a considerable
distance  they did not return till after dark  having killed eight
buffaloe and one deer  the hunt was  however  very fatiguing  as they
were obliged to make a circuit at the distance of more than seven miles 
the cold too  was so excessive that the air was filled with icy
particles resembling a fog  and the snow generally six or eight inches
deep and sometimes eighteen  in consequence of which two of the party
were hurt by falls  and several had their feet frostbitten 

sunday 9  the wind was this day from the east  the thermometer at seven
degrees above 0  and the sun shone clear  two chiefs visited us  one in
a sleigh drawn by a dog and loaded with meat 

monday 10  captain clarke who had gone out yesterday with eighteen men
to bring in the meat we had killed the day before  and to continue the
hunt  came in at twelve o clock  after killing nine buffaloe and
preparing that already dead  he had spent a cold disagreeable night on
the snow  with no covering but a small blanket  sheltered by the hides
of the buffaloe they had killed  we observe large herds of buffaloe
crossing the river on the ice  the men who were frostbitten are
recovering  but the weather is still exceedingly cold  the wind being
from the north  and the thermometer at ten and eleven degrees below 0 
the rise of the river is one inch and a half 

tuesday 11  the weather became so intensely cold that we sent for all
the hunters who had remained out with captain clarke s party  and they
returned in the evening several of them frostbitten  the wind was from
the north and the thermometer at sunrise stood at twenty one below 0 
the ice in the atmosphere being so thick as to render the weather hazy
and give the appearance of two suns reflecting each other  the river
continues at a stand  pocapsahe made us a visit to day 

wednesday  december 12  the wind is still from the north  the
thermometer being at sunrise thirty eight degrees below 0  one of the
ahnahaways brought us down the half of an antelope killed near the fort 
we had been informed that all these animals return to the black
mountains  but there are great numbers of them about us at this season
which we might easily kill  but are unwilling to venture out before our
constitutions are hardened gradually to the climate  we measured the
river on the ice  and find it five hundred yards wide immediately
opposite the fort 

thursday 13  last night was clear and a very heavy frost covered the old
snow  the thermometer at sun rise being twenty degrees below 0  and
followed by a fine day  the river falls 

friday 14  the morning was fine  and the weather having moderated so
far  that the mercury stood at 0  captain lewis went down with a party
to hunt  they proceeded about eighteen miles  but the buffaloe having
left the banks of the river they saw only two  which were so poor as not
to be worth killing  and shot two deer  notwithstanding the snow we were
visited by a large number of the mandans 

saturday 15  captain lewis finding no game returned to the fort hunting
on both sides of the river  but with no success  the wind being from the
north  the mercury at sunrise eight degrees below 0  and the snow of
last night an inch and a half in depth  the indian chiefs continue to
visit us to day with presents of meat 

sunday 16  the morning is clear and cold  the mercury at sunrise 22
degrees below 0  a mr  haney with two other persons from the british
establishment on the assiniboin  arrived in six days with a letter from
mr  charles chabouilles  one of the company  who with much politeness
offered to render us any service in his power 

monday 17  the weather to day was colder than any we had yet
experienced  the thermometer at sunrise being 45 degrees below 0  and
about eight o clock it fell to 74 degrees below the freezing point 
from mr  haney  who is a very sensible intelligent man  we obtained much
geographical information with regard to the country between the missouri
and mississippi  and the various tribes of sioux who inhabit it 

tuesday 18  the thermometer at sunrise was 32 degrees below 0  the
indians had invited us yesterday to join their chace to day  but the
seven men whom we sent returned in consequence of the cold  which was so
severe last night that we were obliged to have the sentinel relieved
every half hour  the northwest traders however left us on their return
home 

wednesday 19  the weather moderated  and the river rose a little 
so that we were enabled to continue the picketing of the fort 
notwithstanding the extreme cold  we observe the indians at the village
engaged out in the open air at a game which resembled billiards more
than any thing we had seen  and which we inclined to suspect may have
been acquired by ancient intercourse with the french of canada  from the
first to the second chief s lodge  a distance of about fifty yards  was
covered with timber smoothed and joined so as to be as level as the
floor of one of our houses  with a battery at the end to stop the rings 
these rings were of clay stone and flat like the chequers for drafts 
and the sticks were about four feet long  with two short pieces at one
end in the form of a mace  so fixed that the whole will slide along the
board  two men fix themselves at one end  each provided with a stick 
and one of them with a ring  they then run along the board  and about
half way slide the sticks after the ring 

thursday 20  the wind was from the n w  the weather moderate  the
thermometer 24 degrees above at sunrise  we availed ourselves of this
change to picket the fort near the river 

friday 21  the day was fine and warm  the wind n w  by w  the indian
who had been prevented a few days ago from killing his wife  came with
both his wives to the fort  and was very desirous of reconciling our
interpreter  a jealousy against whom on account of his wife s taking
refuge in his house  had been the cause of his animosity  a woman
brought her child with an abscess in the lower part of the back  and
offered as much corn as she could carry for some medicine  we
administered to it of course very cheerfully 

saturday  22d  a number of squaws and men dressed like squaws brought
corn to trade for small articles with the men  among other things we
procured two horns of the animal called by the french the rock mountain
sheep  and known to the mandans by the name of ahsahta  the animal
itself is about the size of a small elk or large deer  the horns winding
like those of a ram which they resemble also in texture  though larger
and thicker 

sunday  23d  the weather was fine and warm like that of yesterday  we
were again visited by crowds of indians of all descriptions  who came
either to trade or from mere curiosity  among the rest kogahami  the
little raven  brought his wife and son loaded with corn  and she then
entertained us with a favourite mandan dish  a mixture of pumpkins 
beans  corn  and chokecherries with the stones  all boiled together in a
kettle  and forming a composition by no means unpalatable 

monday  24th  the day continued warm and pleasant  and the number of
visitors became troublesome  as a present to three of the chiefs  we
divided a fillet of sheepskin which we brought for spunging into three
pieces each of two inches in width  they were delighted at the gift 
which they deemed of equal value with a fine horse  we this day
completed our fort  and the next morning being christmas 

tuesday  25th  we were awaked before day by a discharge of three
platoons from the party  we had told the indians not to visit us as it
was one of our great medicine days  so that the men remained at home and
amused themselves in various ways  particularly with dancing in which
they take great pleasure  the american flag was hoisted for the first
time in the fort  the best provisions we had were brought out  and this 
with a little brandy  enabled them to pass the day in great festivity 

wednesday  26th  the weather is again temperate  but no indians have
come to see us  one of the northwest traders who came down to request
the aid of our minnetaree interpreter  informs us that a party of
minnetarees who had gone in pursuit of the assiniboins who lately stole
their horses had just returned  as is their custom  they came back in
small detachments  the last of which brought home eight horses which
they had captured or stolen from an assiniboin camp on mouse river 

thursday  27th  a little fine snow fell this morning and the air was
colder than yesterday  with a high northwest wind  we were fortunate
enough to have among our men a good blacksmith  whom we set to work to
make a variety of articles  his operations seemed to surprise the
indians who came to see us  but nothing could equal their astonishment
at the bellows  which they considered as a very great medicine  having
heretofore promised a more particular account of the sioux  the
following may serve as a general outline of their history 

almost the whole of that vast tract of country comprised between the
mississippi  the red river of lake winnepeg  the saskaskawan  and the
missouri  is loosely occupied by a great nation whose primitive name is
darcota  but who are called sioux by the french  sues by the english 
their original seats were on the mississippi  but they have gradually
spread themselves abroad and become subdivided into numerous tribes  of
these  what may be considered as the darcotas are the mindawarcarton  or
minowakanton  known to the french by the name of the gens du lac  or
people of the lake  their residence is on both sides of the mississippi
near the falls of st  anthony  and the probable number of their warriors
about three hundred  above them  on the river st  peter s  is the
wahpatone  a smaller band of nearly two hundred men  and still farther
up the same river below yellow wood river are the wahpatootas or gens de
feuilles  an inferior band of not more than one hundred men  while the
sources of the st  peter s are occupied by the sisatoones  a band
consisting of about two hundred warriors 

these bands rarely if ever approach the missouri  which is occupied by
their kinsmen the yanktons and the tetons  the yanktons are of two
tribes  those of the plains  or rather of the north  a wandering race of
about five hundred men  who roam over the plains at the heads of the
jacques  the sioux  and the red river  and those of the south  who
possess the country between the jacques and sioux rivers and the
desmoine  but the bands of sioux most known on the missouri are the
tetons  the first who are met on ascending the missouri is the tribe
called by the french the tetons of the boise brule or burntwood  who
reside on both sides of the missouri  about white and teton rivers  and
number two hundred warriors  above them on the missouri are the teton
okandandas  a band of one hundred and fifty men living below the
chayenne river  between which and the wetarhoo river is a third band 
called teton minnakenozzo  of nearly two hundred and fifty men  and
below the warreconne is the fourth and last tribe of tetons of about
three hundred men  and called teton saone  northward of these  between
the assiniboin and the missouri  are two bands of assiniboins  one on
mouse river of about two hundred men  and called assiniboin menatopa 
the other  residing on both sides of white river  called by the french
gens de feuilles  and amounting to two hundred and fifty men  beyond
these a band of assiniboins of four hundred and fifty men  and called
the big devils  wander on the heads of milk  porcupine  and martha s
rivers  while still farther to the north are seen two bands of the same
nation  one of five hundred and the other of two hundred  roving on the
saskaskawan  those assiniboins are recognised by a similarity of
language  and by tradition as descendents or seceders from the sioux 
though often at war are still acknowledged as relations  the sioux
themselves  though scattered  meet annually on the jacques  those on the
missouri trading with those on the mississippi 




                                chapter vi 

     the party increase in the favour of the mandans  description of a
     buffaloe dance  medicine dance  the fortitude with which the
     indians bear the severity of the season  distress of the party for
     want of provisions  the great importance of the blacksmith in
     procuring it  depredations of the sioux  the homage paid to the
     medicine stone  summary act of justice among the minnetarees  the
     process by which the mandans and ricaras make beads  character of
     the missouri  of the surrounding country  and of the rivers 
     creeks  islands   c 


friday  28th  the wind continued high last night  the frost severe  and
the snow drifting in great quantities through the plains 

saturday  29th  there was a frost fell last night nearly one quarter of
an inch in depth  which continued to fall till the sun had gained some
height  the mercury at sunrise stood at 9 degrees below 0  there were a
number of indians at the fort in the course of the day 

sunday  30th  the weather was cold  and the thermometer 20 degrees below
0  we killed one deer  and yesterday one of the men shot a wolf  the
indians brought corn  beans  and squashes  which they very readily gave
for getting their axes and kettles mended  in their general conduct
during these visits they are honest  but will occasionally pilfer any
small article 

monday  31  during the night there was a high wind which covered the ice
with hillocks of mixed sand and snow  the day was however fine  and the
indians came in great numbers for the purpose of having their utensils
repaired 

tuesday  january 1  1805  the new year was welcomed by two shot from the
swivel and a round of small arms  the weather was cloudy but moderate 
the mercury which at sunrise was at 18 degrees  in the course of the day
rose to 34 degrees above 0  towards evening it began to rain  and at
night we had snow  the temperature for which is about 0  in the morning
we permitted sixteen men with their music to go up to the first village 
where they delighted the whole tribe with their dances  particularly
with the movements of one of the frenchmen who danced on his head  in
return they presented the dancers with several buffaloe robes and
quantities of corn  we were desirous of showing this attention to the
village  because they had received an impression that we had been
wanting in regard for them  and they had in consequence circulated
invidious comparisons between us and the northern traders  all these
however they declared to captain clarke  who visited them in the course
of the morning  were made in jest  as captain clarke was about leaving
the village  two of their chiefs returned from a mission to the
grosventres or wandering minnetarees  these people were encamped about
ten miles above  and while there one of the ahnahaways had stolen a
minnetaree girl  the whole nation immediately espoused the quarrel  and
one hundred and fifty of their warriors were marching down to revenge
the insult on the ahnahaways  the chief of that nation took the girl
from the ravisher  and giving her to the mandans requested their
intercession  the messengers went out to meet the warriors  and
delivered the young damsel into the hands of her countrymen  smoked the
pipe of peace with them  and were fortunate enough to avert their
indignation and induce them to return  in the evening some of the men
came to the fort and the rest slept in the village  pocapsahe also
visited us and brought some meat on his wife s back 

wednesday  january 2  it snowed last night  and during this day the same
scene of gayety was renewed at the second village  and all the men
returned in the evening 

thursday 3  last night it became very cold  and this morning we had some
snow  our hunters were sent out for buffaloe  but the game had been
frightened from the river by the indians  so that they obtained only
one  they however killed a hare and a wolf  among the indians who
visited us was a minnetaree who came to seek his wife  she had been much
abused and came here for protection  but returned with him  as we had no
authority to separate those whom even the mandan rites had united 

friday 4  the morning was cloudy and warm  the mercury being 28 degrees
above 0  but towards evening the wind changed to northwest  and the
weather became cold  we sent some hunters down the river  but they
killed only one buffaloe and a wolf  we received the visit of kagohami
who is very friendly  and to whom we gave a hankerchief and two files 

saturday 5  we had high and boisterous winds last night and this
morning  the indians continue to purchase repairs with grain of
different kinds  in the first village there has been a buffaloe dance
for the last three nights  which has put them all into commotion  and
the description which we received from those of the party who visited
the village and from other sources  is not a little ludicrous  the
buffaloe dance is an institution originally intended for the benefit of
the old men  and practised at their suggestion  when buffaloe becomes
scarce they send a man to harangue the village  declaring that the game
is far off and that a feast is necessary to bring it back  and if the
village be disposed a day and place is named for the celebration of it 
at the appointed hour the old men arrive  and seat themselves
crosslegged on skins round a fire in the middle of the lodge with a sort
of doll or small image  dressed like a female  placed before them  the
young men bring with them a platter of provisions  a pipe of tobacco 
and their wives  whose dress on the occasion is only a robe or mantle
loosely thrown round the body  on their arrival each youth selects the
old man whom he means to distinguish by his favour  and spreads before
him the provisions  after which he presents the pipe and smokes with
him  mox senex vir simulacrum parvae puellae ostensit  tune egrediens
eaetu  jecit effigium solo et superincumbens  senili ardore veneris
complexit  hoc est signum  denique uxor e turba recessit  et jactu
corporis  fovet amplexus viri solo recubante  maritus appropinquans
senex vir dejecto vultu  et honorem et dignitatem ejus conservare
amplexu uxoris illum oravit  forsitan imprimis ille refellit  dehine 
maritus multis precibus  multis lachrymis  et multis donis vehementer
intercessit  tune senex amator perculsus miserecordia  tot precibus  tot
lachrymis  et tot donis  conjugali amplexu submisit  multum ille
jactatus est  sed debilis et effoetus senectute  frustra jactatus est 
maritus interdum stans juxta guadit multum honore  et ejus dignitati sic
conservata  unus nostrum sodalium multum alacrior et potentior
juventute  hac nocte honorem quartour maritorum custodivit 

sunday 6  a clear cold morning with high wind  we caught in a trap a
large gray wolf  and last night obtained in the same way a fox who had
for some time infested the neighbourhood of the fort  only a few indians
visited us to day 

monday 7  the weather was again clear and cold with a high northwest
wind  and the thermometer at sunrise 22 degrees below 0  the river fell
an inch  shahaka the big white chief dined with us  and gave a connected
sketch of the country as far as the mountains 

tuesday 8  the wind was still from the northwest  the day cold  and we
received few indians at the fort  besides the buffaloe dance we have
just described  there is another called medicine dance  an entertainment
given by any person desirous of doing honour to his medicine or genius 
he announces  that on such a day he will sacrifice his horses  or other
property  and invites the young females of the village to assist in
rendering homage to his medicine  all the inhabitants may join in the
solemnity  which is performed in the open plain and by daylight  but the
dance is reserved for the virgins or at least the unmarried females  who
disdain the incumbrance or the ornament of dress  the feast is opened
by devoting the goods of the master of the feast to his medicine  which
is represented by a head of the animal itself  or by a medicine bag if
the deity be an invisible being  the young women then begin the dance 
in the intervals of which each will prostrate herself before the
assembly to challenge or reward the boldness of the youth  who are often
tempted by feeling or the hopes of distinction to achieve the adventure 

wednesday 9  the weather is cold  the thermometer at sunrise 21 degrees
below 0  kagohami breakfasted with us  and captain clarke with three or
four men accompanied him and a party of indians to hunt  in which they
were so fortunate as to kill a number of buffaloe  but they were
incommoded by snow  by high and squally winds  and by extreme cold 
several of the indians came to the fort nearly frozen  others are
missing  and we are uneasy  for one of our men who was separated from
the rest during the chase has not returned  in the morning 

thursday 10  however  he came back just as we were sending out five men
in search of him  the night had been excessively cold  and this morning
at sunrise the mercury stood at 40 degrees below 0  or 72 below the
freezing point  he had however  made a fire and kept himself tolerably
warm  a young indian  about thirteen years of age  also came in soon
after  his father who came last night to inquire after him very
anxiously  had sent him in the afternoon to the fort  he was overtaken
by the night  and was obliged to sleep on the snow with no covering
except a pair of antelope skin moccasins and leggings and a buffaloe
robe  his feet being frozen we put them into cold water  and gave him
every attention in our power  about the same time an indian who had also
been missing returned to the fort  and although his dress was very thin 
and he had slept on the snow without a fire  he had not suffered the
slightest inconvenience  we have indeed observed that these indians
support the rigours of the season in a way which we had hitherto thought
impossible  a more pleasing reflection occurred at seeing the warm
interest which the situation of these two persons had excited in the
village  the boy had been a prisoner and adopted from charity  yet the
distress of the father proved that he felt for him the tenderest
affection  the man was a person of no distinction  yet the whole village
was full of anxiety for his safety and when they came to us  borrowed a
sleigh to bring them home with ease  if they survived  or to carry their
bodies if they had perished 

friday 11  we despatched three hunters to join the same number whom we
had sent below about seven miles to hunt elk  like that of yesterday the
weather to day was cold and clear  the thermometer standing at 38
degrees below 0  poscopsahe and shotahawrora visited us  and past the
night at the fort 

saturday 12  the weather continues very cold  the mercury at sunrise
being 20 degrees below 0  three of the hunters returned  having killed
three elk 

sunday 13  we have a continuation of clear weather  and the cold has
increased  the mercury having sunk to 34 degrees below 0  nearly one
half of the mandan nation passed down the river to hunt for several
days  in these excursions men  women and children  with their dogs  all
leave the village together  and after discovering a spot convenient for
the game  fix their tents  all the family bear their part in the labour 
and the game is equally divided among the families of the tribe  when a
single hunter returns from the chase with more than is necessary for his
own immediate consumption  the neighbours are entitled by custom to a
share of it  they do not however ask for it  but send a squaw  who
without saying any thing  sits down by the door of the lodge till the
master understands the hint  and gives her gratuitously a part for her
family  chaboneau who with one man had gone to some lodges of
minnetarees near the turtle mountain  returned with their faces much
frostbitten  they had been about ninety miles distant  and procured
from the inhabitants some meat and grease  with which they loaded the
horses  he informs us that the agent of the hudson bay company at that
place  had been endeavouring to make unfavourable impressions with
regard to us on the mind of the great chief  and that the n w  company
intend building a fort there  the great chief had in consequence spoken
slightly of the americans  but said that if we would give him our great
flag he would come and see us 

monday 14  the mandans continue to pass down the river on their hunting
party  and were joined by six of our men  one of those sent on thursday
returned  with information that one of his companions had his feet so
badly frostbitten that he could not walk home  in their excursion they
had killed a buffaloe  a wolf  two porcupines and a white hare  the
weather was more moderate to day  the mercury being at 16 degrees below
0  and the wind from the s e  we had however some snow  after which it
remained cloudy 

tuesday 15  the morning is much warmer than yesterday  and the snow
begins to melt  though the wind after being for some time from the s e 
suddenly shifted to n w  between twelve and three o clock a m  there was
a total eclipse of the moon  from which we obtained a part of the
observation necessary for ascertaining the longitude 

we were visited by four of the most distinguished men of the
minnetarees  to whom we showed marked attentions  as we knew that they
had been taught to entertain strong prejudices against us  these we
succeeded so well in removing  that when in the morning 

wednesday 16  about thirty mandans  among whom six were chiefs came to
see us  the minnetarees reproached them with their falsehoods  declaring
that they were bad men and ought to hide themselves  they had told the
minnetarees that we would kill them if they came to the fort  yet on the
contrary they had spent a night there and been treated with kindness by
the whites  who had smoked with them and danced for their amusement 
kagohami visited us and brought us a little corn  and soon afterwards
one of the first war chiefs of the minnetarees came accompanied by his
squaw  a handsome woman  whom he was desirous we should use during the
night  he favoured us with a more acceptable present  a draft of the
missouri in his manner  and informed us of his intention to go to war in
the spring against the snake indians  we advised him to reflect
seriously before he committed the peace of his nation to the hazards of
war  to look back on the numerous nations whom war has destroyed  that
if he wished his nation to be happy he should cultivate peace and
intercourse with all his neighbours  by which means they would procure
more horses  increase in numbers  and that if he went to war he would
displease his great father the president  and forfeit his protection  we
added that we had spoken thus to all the tribes whom we had met  that
they had all opened their ears  and that the president would compel
those who did not voluntarily listen to his advice  although a young man
of only twenty six years of age  this discourse seemed to strike him  he
observed that if it would be displeasing to us he would not go to war 
since he had horses enough  and that he would advise all the nation to
remain at home  until we had seen the snake indians  and discovered
whether their intentions were pacific  the party who went down with the
horses for the man who was frostbitten returned  and we are glad to find
his complaint not serious 

thursday 17  the day was very windy from the north  the morning clear
and cold  the thermometer at sunrise being at 0  we had several indians
with us 

friday 18  the weather is fine and moderate  messrs  laroche and
m kenzie  two of the n w  company s traders  visited us with some of the
minnetarees  in the afternoon two of our hunters returned  having killed
four wolves and a blaireau 

saturday 19  another cloudy day  the two traders set out on their
return  and we sent two men with the horses thirty miles below to the
hunting camp 

sunday 20  the day fair and cold  a number of indians visit us with corn
to exchange for articles  and to pay for repairs to their household
utensils 

monday 21  the weather was fine and moderate  the hunters all returned 
having killed during their absence three elk  four deer  two porcupines 
a fox and a hare 

tuesday 22  the cold having moderated and the day pleasant  we attempted
to cut the boats out of the ice  but at the distance of eight inches
came to water  under which the ice became three feet thick  so that we
were obliged to desist 

wednesday 23  the cold weather returned  the mercury having sunk 2
degrees below 0  and the snow fell four inches deep 

thursday 24  the day was colder than any we have had lately  the
thermometer being at 12 degrees below 0  the hunters whom we sent out
returned unsuccessful  and the rest were occupied in cutting wood to
make charcoal 

friday 25  the thermometer was at 25 degrees below 0  the wind from n w 
and the day fair  so that the men were employed in preparing coal  and
cutting the boats out of the ice  a band of assiniboins headed by their
chief  called by the french  son of the little calf  have arrived at the
villages 

saturday 26  a fine warm day  a number of indians dine with us  and one
of our men is attacked with a violent pleurisy 

sunday 27  another warm and pleasant day  we again attempted to get the
boat out of the ice  the man who has the pleurisy was blooded and
sweated  and we were forced to take off the toes of the young indian who
was frostbitten some time since  our interpreter returned from the
villages  bringing with him three of mr  laroche s horses which he had
sent in order to keep them out of the way of the assiniboins  who are
very much disposed to steal  and who have just returned to their camp 

monday 28  the weather to day is clear and cold  we are obliged to
abandon the plan of cutting the boat through the ice  and therefore made
another attempt the next day 

tuesday 29  by heating a quantity of stones so as to warm the water in
the boat  and thaw the surrounding ice  but in this too we were
disappointed  as all the stones on being put into the fire cracked into
pieces  the weather warm and pleasant  the man with the pleurisy is
recovering 

wednesday 30  the morning was fair  but afterwards became cloudy  mr 
laroche the trader from the northwest company paid us a visit  in hopes
of being able to accompany us on our journey westward  but this proposal
we thought it best to decline 

thursday 31  it snowed last night  and the morning is cold and
disagreeable  with a high wind from the northwest  we sent five hunters
down the river  another man is taken with the pleurisy 

friday  february 1  a cold windy day  our hunters returned having killed
only one deer  one of the minnetaree war chiefs  a young man named
maubuksheahokeah or seeing snake  came to see us and procure a war
hatchet  he also requested that we would suffer him to go to war against
the sioux and ricaras who had killed a mandan some time ago  this we
refused for reasons which we explained to him  he acknowledged that we
were right  and promised to open his ears to our counsels 

saturday 2  the day is fine  another deer was killed  mr  laroche who
has been very anxious to go with us left the fort to day  and one of the
squaws of the minnetaree interpreter is taken ill 

sunday 3  the weather is again pleasant  disappointed in all our efforts
to get the boats free  we occupied ourselves in making iron spikes so as
to prize them up by means of long poles 

monday 4  the morning fair and cold  the mercury at sunrise being 18
degrees below 0  and the wind from the northwest  the stock of meat
which we had procured in november and december being now nearly
exhausted  it became necessary to renew our supply  captain clarke
therefore took eighteen men  and with two sleighs and three horses
descended the river for the purpose of hunting  as the buffaloe has
disappeared from our neighbourhood  and the indians are themselves
suffering for want of meat  two deer were killed to day but they were
very lean 

tuesday 5  a pleasant fair morning with the wind from northwest  a
number of the indians come with corn for the blacksmith  who being now
provided with coal has become one of our greatest resources for
procuring grain  they seem particularly attached to a battle axe  of a
very inconvenient figure  it is made wholly of iron  the blade extremely
thin  and from seven to nine inches long  it is sharp at the point and
five or six inches on each side  whence they converge towards the eye 
which is circular and about an inch in diameter  the blade itself being
not more than an inch wide  the handle is straight  and twelve or
fifteen inches long  the whole weighing about a pound  by way of
ornament  the blade is perforated with several circular holes  the
length of the blade compared with the shortness of the handle render it
a weapon of very little strength  particularly as it is always used on
horseback  there is still however another form which is even worse  the
same sort of handle being fixed to a blade resembling an espontoon 

wednesday  february 6  the morning was fair and pleasant  the wind n w 
a number of indian chiefs visited us and withdrew after we had smoked
with them contrary to their custom  for after being once introduced into
our apartment they are fond of lounging about during the remainder of
the day  one of the men killed three antelopes  our blacksmith has his
time completely occupied  so great is the demand for utensils of
different kinds  the indians are particularly fond of sheet iron  out of
which they form points for arrows and instruments for scraping hides 
and when the blacksmith cut up an old cambouse of that metal  we
obtained for every piece of four inches square seven or eight gallons of
corn from the indians  who were delighted at the exchange 

thursday 7  the morning was fair and much warmer than for some days  the
thermometer being at 18 degrees above 0  and the wind from the s e  a
number of indians continue to visit us  but learning that the
interpreter s squaws had been accustomed to unbar the gate during the
night  we ordered a lock put on it  and that no indian should remain in
the fort all night  nor any person admitted during the hours when the
gate is closed  that is from sunset to sunrise 

friday 8  a fair pleasant morning  with s e  winds  pocopsahe came down
to the fort with a bow  and apologized for his not having finished a
shield which he had promised captain lewis  and which the weather had
prevented him from completing  this chief possesses more firmness 
intelligence  and integrity  than any indian of this country  and he
might be rendered highly serviceable in our attempts to civilize the
nation  he mentioned that the mandans are very much in want of meat  and
that he himself had not tasted any for several days  to this distress
they are often reduced by their own improvidence  or by their unhappy
situation  their principal article of food is buffaloe meat  their corn 
beans  and other grain being reserved for summer  or as a last resource
against what they constantly dread  an attack from the sioux  who drive
off the game and confine them to their villages  the same fear too
prevents their going out to hunt in small parties to relieve their
occasional wants  so that the buffaloe is generally obtained in large
quantities and wasted by carelessness 

saturday 9  the morning was fair and pleasant  the wind from the s e 
mr  m kenzie from the n w  company establishment visited us 

sunday 10  a slight snow fell in the course of the night  the morning
was cloudy  and the northwest wind blew so high that although the
thermometer was 18 degrees above 0  the day was cooler than yesterday 
when it was only 10 degrees above the same point  mr  m kenzie left us 
and chaboneau returned with information that our horses loaded with meat
were below  but could not cross the ice not being shod 

monday 11  we sent down a party with sleds  to relieve the horses from
their loads  the weather fair and cold  with a n w  wind  about five
o clock one of the wives of chaboneau was delivered of a boy  this being
her first child she was suffering considerable  when mr  jessaume told
captain lewis that he had frequently administered to persons in her
situation  a small dose of the rattle of the rattlesnake which had never
failed to hasten the delivery  having some of the rattle  captain lewis
gave it to mr  jessaume who crumbled two of the rings of it between his
fingers  and mixing it with a small quantity of water gave it to her 
what effect it may really have had it might be difficult to determine 
but captain lewis was informed that she had not taken it more than ten
minutes before the delivery took place 

tuesday 12  the morning is fair though cold  the mercury being 14
degrees below the wind from the s e  about four o clock the horses were
brought in much fatigued  on giving them meal bran moistened with water
they would not eat it  but preferred the bark of the cottonwood  which
as is already observed forms their principal food during the winter  the
horses of the mandans are so often stolen by the sioux  ricaras  and
assiniboins  that the invariable rule now is to put the horses every
night in the same lodge with the family  in the summer they ramble in
the plains in the vicinity of the camp  and feed on the grass  but
during cold weather the squaws cut down the cottonwood trees as they are
wanted  and the horses feed on the boughs and bark of the tender
branches  which are also brought into the lodges at night and placed
near them  these animals are very severely treated  for whole days they
are pursuing the buffaloe  or burdened with the fruits of the chase 
during which they scarcely ever taste food  and at night return to a
scanty allowance of wood  yet the spirit of this valuable animal
sustains him through all these difficulties  and he is rarely deficient
either in flesh or vigour 

wednesday 13  the morning was cloudy  the thermometer at 2 degrees below
0  the wind from the southeast  captain clarke returned last evening
with all his hunting party  during their excursion they had killed forty
deer  three buffaloe  and sixteen elk  but most of the game was too lean
for use  and the wolves  who regard whatever lies out at night as their
own  had appropriated a large part of it  when he left the fort on the
4th instant  he descended on the ice twenty two miles to new mandan
island  near some of their old villages  and encamped  having killed
nothing  and therefore without food for the night 

early on the 5th  the hunters went out and killed two buffaloe and a
deer  but the last only could be used  the others being too lean  after
breakfast they proceeded down to an indian lodge and hunted during the
day  the next morning  6th  they encamped forty four miles from the fort
on a sand point near the mouth of a creek on the southwest side  which
they call hunting creek  and during this and the following day hunted
through all the adjoining plains  with much success  having killed a
number of deer and elk  on the 8th  the best of the meat was sent with
the horses to the fort  and such parts of the remainder as were fit for
use were brought to a point of the river three miles below  and after
the bones were taken out  secured in pens built of logs  so as to keep
off the wolves  ravens and magpies  who are very numerous and constantly
disappoint the hunter of his prey  they then went to the low grounds
near the chisshetaw river where they encamped  but saw nothing except
some wolves on the hills  and a number of buffaloe too poor to be worth
hunting  the next morning 9th  as there was no game and it would have
been inconvenient to send it back sixty miles to the fort  they returned
up the river  and for three days hunted along the banks and plains  and
reached the fort in the evening of the twelfth much fatigued  having
walked thirty miles that day on the ice and through the snow in many
places knee deep  the moccasins too being nearly worn out  the only game
which they saw besides what is mentioned  was some growse on the
sandbars in the river 

thursday 14  last night the snow fell three inches deep  the day was 
however  fine  four men were despatched with sleds and three horses to
bring up the meat which had been collected by the hunters  they returned
however  with intelligence that about twenty one miles below the fort a
party of upwards of one hundred men  whom they supposed to be sioux 
rushed on them  cut the traces of the sleds  and carried off two of the
horses  the third being given up by intercession of an indian who seemed
to possess some authority over them  they also took away two of the
men s knifes  and a tomahawk  which last however they returned  we sent
up to the mandans to inform them of it  and to know whether any of them
would join a party which intended to pursue the robbers in the morning 
about twelve o clock two of their chiefs came down and said that all
their young men were out hunting  and that there were few guns in the
village  several indians however  armed some with bows and arrows  some
with spears and battle axes  and two with fusils  accompanied captain
lewis  who set out 

friday 15  at sunrise with twenty four men  the morning was fine and
cool  the thermometer being at 16 degrees below 0  in the course of the
day one of the mandan chiefs returned from captain lewis s party  his
eye sight having become so bad that he could not proceed  at this season
of the year the reflexion from the ice and snow is so intense as to
occasion almost total blindness  this complaint is very common  and the
general remedy is to sweat the part affected by holding the face over a
hot stone  and receiving the fumes from snow thrown on it  a large red
fox was killed to day 

saturday 16  the morning was warm  mercury at 32 degrees above 0  the
weather cloudy  several of the indians who went with captain lewis
returned  as did also one of our men  whose feet had been frostbitten 

sunday 17  the weather continued as yesterday  though in the afternoon
it became fair  shotawhorora and his son came to see us  with about
thirty pounds of dried buffaloe meat and some tallow 

monday 18  the morning was cloudy with some snow  but in the latter part
of the day it cleared up  mr  m kenzie who had spent yesterday at the
fort now left us  our stock of meat is exhausted  so that we must
confine ourselves to vegetable diet  at least till the return of the
party  for this  however  we are at no loss  since both on this and the
following day 

tuesday 19  our blacksmith got large quantities of corn from the indians
who came in great numbers to see us  the weather was fair and warm  the
wind from the south 

wednesday  20th  the day was delightfully fine  the mercury being at
sunrise 2 degrees and in the course of the day 22 degrees above 0  the
wind southerly  kagohami came down to see us early  his village is
afflicted by the death of one of their eldest men  who from his account
to us must have seen one hundred and twenty winters  just as he was
dying  he requested his grandchildren to dress him in his best robe when
he was dead  and then carry him on a hill and seat him on a stone  with
his face down the river towards their old villages  that he might go
straight to his brother who had passed before him to the ancient village
under ground  we have seen a number of mandans who have lived to a great
age  chiefly however the men  whose robust exercises fortify the body 
while the laborious occupations of the women shorten their existence 

thursday 21  we had a continuation of the same pleasant weather  oheenaw
and shahaka came down to see us  and mentioned that several of their
countrymen had gone to consult their medicine stone as to the prospects
of the following year  this medicine stone is the great oracle of the
mandans  and whatever it announces is believed with implicit confidence 
every spring  and on some occasions during the summer  a deputation
visits the sacred spot  where there is a thick porous stone twenty feet
in circumference  with a smooth surface  having reached the place the
ceremony of smoking to it is performed by the deputies  who alternately
take a whiff themselves and then present the pipe to the stone  after
this they retire to an adjoining wood for the night  during which it may
be safely presumed that all the embassy do not sleep  and in the morning
they read the destinies of the nation in the white marks on the stone 
which those who made them are at no loss to decypher  the minnetarees
have a stone of a similar kind  which has the same qualities and the
same influence over the nation  captain lewis returned from his
excursion in pursuit of the indians  on reaching the place where the
sioux had stolen our horses  they found only one sled  and several pair
of moccasins which were recognised to be those of the sioux  the party
then followed the indian tracks till they reached two old lodges where
they slept  and the next morning pursued the course of the river till
they reached some indian camps  where captain clarke passed the night
some time ago  and which the sioux had now set on fire  leaving a little
corn near the place in order to induce a belief that they were ricaras 
from this point the sioux tracks left the river abruptly and crossed
into the plains  but perceiving that there was no chance of overtaking
them  captain lewis went down to the pen where captain clarke had left
some meat  which he found untouched by the indians  and then hunted in
the low grounds on the river  till he returned with about three thousand
pounds of meat  some drawn in a sled by fifteen of the men  and the rest
on horseback  having killed thirty six deer  fourteen elk  and one wolf 

friday  22nd  the morning was cloudy and a little snow fell  but in the
afternoon the weather became fair  we were visited by a number of
indians  among whom was shotawhorora  a chief of much consideration
among the mandan  although by birth a ricara 

saturday  23d  the day is warm and pleasant  having worked industriously
yesterday and all this morning we were enabled to disengage one of the
periogues and haul it on shore  and also nearly to cut out the second 
the father of the boy whose foot had been so badly frozen  and whom we
had now cured  came to day and carried him home in a sleigh 

sunday  24th  the weather is again fine  we succeeded in loosening the
second periogue and barge  though we found a leak in the latter  the
whole of the next day 

monday  25th  we were occupied in drawing up the boats on the bank  the
smallest one we carried there with no difficulty  but the barge was too
heavy for our elk skin ropes which constantly broke  we were visited by
orupsehara  or black moccasin  and several other chiefs  who brought us
presents of meat on the backs of their squaws  and one of the
minnetarees requested and obtained permission for himself and his two
wives to remain all night in the fort  the day was exceedingly pleasant 

tuesday 26  the weather is again fine  by great labour during the day we
got all the boats on the bank by sunset  an operation which attracted a
great number of indians to the fort 

wednesday 27  the weather continues fine  all of us employed in
preparing tools to build boats for our voyage  as we find that small
periogues will be much more convenient than the barge in ascending the
missouri 

thursday 28  the day is clear and pleasant  sixteen men were sent out to
examine the country for trees suitable for boats  and were successful in
finding them  two of the n w  company traders arrived with letters  they
had likewise a root which is used for the cure of persons bitten by mad
dogs  snakes  and other venomous animals  it is found on high grounds
and the sides of hills  and the mode of using it is to scarify the
wound  and apply to it an inch or more of the chewed or pounded root 
which is to be renewed twice a day  the patient must not however chew or
swallow any of the root  as an inward application might be rather
injurious than beneficial 

mr  gravelines with two frenchmen and two indians arrived from the
ricara nation  with letters from mr  anthony tabeau  this last gentleman
informs us that the ricaras express their determination to follow our
advice  and to remain at peace with the mandans and minnetarees  whom
they are desirous of visiting  they also wish to know whether these
nations would permit the ricaras to settle near them  and form a league
against their common enemies the sioux  on mentioning this to the
mandans they agreed to it  observing that they always desired to
cultivate friendship with the ricaras  and that the ahnahaways and
minnetarees have the same friendly views 

mr  gravelines states that the band of tetons whom we had seen was well
disposed to us  owing to the influence of their chief the black
buffaloe  but that the three upper bands of tetons  with the sisatoons 
and the yanktons of the north  mean soon to attack the indians in this
quarter  with a resolution to put to death every white man they
encounter  moreover  that mr  cameron of st  peter s has armed the sioux
against the chippeways  who have lately put to death three of his men 
the men who had stolen our horses we found to be all sioux  who after
committing the outrage went to the ricara villages  where they said that
they had hesitated about killing our men who were with the horses  but
that in future they would put to death any of us they could  as we were
bad medicines and deserved to be killed  the ricaras were displeased at
their conduct and refused to give them any thing to eat  which is
deemed the greatest act of hostility short of actual violence 

friday  march 1  the day is fine  and the whole party is engaged  some
in making ropes and periogues  others in burning coal  and making battle
axes to sell for corn 

saturday 2  mr  laroche one of the n w  company s traders has just
arrived with merchandise from the british establishments on the
assiniboin  the day is fine  and the river begins to break up in some
places  the mercury being between 28 degrees and 36 degrees above 0  and
the wind from the n e  we were visited by several indians 

sunday 3  the weather pleasant  the wind from the e  with clouds  in the
afternoon the clouds disappeared and the wind came from the n w  the men
are all employed in preparing the boats  we are visited by poscapsahe
and several other indians with corn  a flock of ducks passed up the
river to day 

monday 4  a cloudy morning with n w  wind  the latter part of the day
clear  we had again some indian visitors with a small present of meat 
the assiniboins  who a few days since visited the mandans  returned  and
attempted to take horses from the minnetarees  who fired on them  a
circumstance which may occasion some disturbance between the two
nations 

tuesday 5  about four o clock in the morning there was a slight fall of
snow  but the day became clear and pleasant with the mercury 40 degrees
above 0  we sent down an indian and a frenchman to the ricara villages
with a letter to mr  tabeau 

wednesday 6  the day was cloudy and smoky in consequence of the burning
of the plains by the minnetarees  they have set all the neighbouring
country on fire in order to obtain an early crop of grass which may
answer for the consumption of their horses  and also as an inducement
for the buffaloe and other game to visit it  the horses stolen two days
ago by the assiniboins have been returned to the minnetarees  ohhaw
second chief of the lower minnetaree village came to see us  the river
rose a little and overran the ice  so as to render the crossing
difficult 

thursday  7th  the day was somewhat cloudy  and colder than usual  the
wind from the northeast  shotawhorora visited us with a sick child  to
whom some medicine was administered  there were also other indians who
brought corn and dried buffaloe meat in exchange for blacksmith s work 

friday 8  the day cold and fair with a high easterly wind  we were
visited by two indians who gave us an account of the country and people
near the rocky mountains where they had been 

saturday 9  the morning cloudy and cool  the wind from the north  the
grand chief of the minnetarees  who is called by the french le borgne 
from his having but one eye  came down for the first time to the fort 
he was received with much attention  two guns were fired in honour of
his arrival  the curiosities were exhibited to him  and as he said that
he had not received the presents which we had sent to him on his
arrival  we again gave him a flag  a medal  shirt  armbraces and the
usual presents on such occasions  with all which he was much pleased  in
the course of the conversation  the chief observed that some foolish
young men of his nation had told him there was a person among us who was
quite black  and he wished to know if it could be true  we assured him
that it was true  and sent for york  the borgne was very much surprised
at his appearance  examined him closely  and spit on his finger and
rubbed the skin in order to wash off the paint  nor was it until the
negro uncovered his head  and showed his short hair  that the borgne
could be persuaded that he was not a painted white man 

sunday 10  a cold windy day  tetuckopinreha  chief of the ahnahaways 
and the minnetaree chief ompsehara  passed the day with us  and the
former remained during the night  we had occasion to see an instance of
the summary justice of the indians  a young minnetaree had carried off
the daughter of cagonomokshe  the raven man  second chief of the upper
village of the mandans  the father went to the village and found his
daughter  whom he brought home  and took with him a horse belonging to
the offender  this reprisal satisfied the vengeance of the father and of
the nation  as the young man would not dare to reclaim his horse  which
from that time became the property of the injured party  the stealing of
young women is one of the most common offenses against the police of the
village  and the punishment of it always measured by the power or the
passions of the kindred of the female  a voluntary elopement is of
course more rigorously chastised  one of the wives of the borgne
deserted him in favour of a man who had been her lover before the
marriage  and who after some time left her  and she was obliged to
return to her father s house  as soon as he heard it the borgne walked
there and found her sitting near the fire  without noticing his wife  he
began to smoke with the father  when they were joined by the old men of
the village  who knowing his temper had followed in hopes of appeasing
him  he continued to smoke quietly with them  till rising to return  he
took his wife by the hair  led her as far as the door  and with a single
stroke of his tomahawk put her to death before her father s eyes  then
turning fiercely upon the spectators  he said that if any of her
relations wished to avenge her  they might always find him at his lodge 
but the fate of the woman had not sufficient interest to excite the
vengeance of the family  the caprice or the generosity of the same chief
gave a very different result to a similar incident which occurred some
time afterwards  another of his wives eloped with a young man  who not
being able to support her as she wished they both returned to the
village  and she presented herself before the husband  supplicating his
pardon for her conduct  the borgne sent for the lover  at the moment
when the youth expected that he would be put to death  the chief mildly
asked them if they still preserved their affection for each other  and
on their declaring that want  and not a change of affection had induced
them to return  he gave up his wife to her lover  with the liberal
present of three horses  and restored them both to his favour 

monday 11  the weather was cloudy in the morning and a little snow fell 
the wind then shifted from southeast to northwest and the day became
fair  it snowed again in the evening  but the next day 

tuesday 12  was fair with the wind from the northwest 

wednesday 13  we had a fine day  and a southwest wind  mr  m kenzie came
to see us  as did also many indians who are so anxious for battle axes
that our smiths have not a moment s leisure  and procure us an abundance
of corn  the river rose a little to day  and so continued 

thursday 14  the wind being from the west  and the day fine  the whole
party were employed in building boats and in shelling corn 

friday 15  the day is clear  pleasant and warm  we take advantage of the
fine weather to hang all our indian presents and other articles out to
dry before our departure 

saturday 16  the weather is cloudy  the wind from the southeast  a mr 
garrow  a frenchman who has resided a long time among the ricaras and
mandans  explained to us the mode in which they make their large beads 
an art which they are said to have derived from some prisoners of the
snake indian nation  and the knowledge of which is a secret even now
confined to a few among the mandans and ricaras  the process is as
follows  glass of different colours is first pounded fine and washed 
till each kind  which is kept separate  ceases to stain the water thrown
over it  some well seasoned clay  mixed with a sufficient quantity of
sand to prevent its becoming very hard when exposed to heat  and reduced
by water to the consistency of dough  is then rolled on the palm of the
hand  till it becomes of the thickness wanted for the hole in the bead 
these sticks of clay are placed upright  each on a little pedestal or
ball of the same material about an ounce in weight  and distributed over
a small earthen platter  which is laid on the fire for a few minutes 
when they are taken off to cool  with a little paddle or shovel three or
four inches long and sharpened at the end of the handle  the wet pounded
glass is placed in the palm of the hand  the beads are made of an oblong
form wrapped in a cylindrical form round the stick of clay which is laid
crosswise over it  and gently rolled backwards and forwards till it
becomes perfectly smooth  if it be desired to introduce any other
colour  the surface of the bead is perforated with the pointed end of
the paddle and the cavity filled with pounded glass of that colour  the
sticks with the string of beads are then replaced on their pedestals 
and the platter deposited on burning coals or hot embers  over the
platter an earthern pot containing about three gallons  with a mouth
large enough to cover the platter  is reversed  being completely closed
except a small aperture at the top  through which are watched the bead 
a quantity of old dried wood formed into a sort of dough or paste is
placed round the pot so as almost to cover it  and afterwards set on
fire  the manufacturer then looks through the small hole in the pot 
till he sees the beads assume a deep red colour  to which succeeds a
paler or whitish red  or they become pointed at the upper extremity  on
which the fire is removed and the pot suffered to cool gradually  at
length it is removed  the beads taken out  the clay in the hollow of
them picked out with an awl or needle  and it is then fit for use  the
beads thus formed are in great demand among the indians  and used as
pendants to their ears and hair  and are sometimes worn round the neck 

sunday 17  a windy but clear and pleasant day  the river rising a little
and open in several places  our minnetaree interpreter chaboneau  whom
we intended taking with us to the pacific  had some days ago been worked
upon by the british traders  and appeared unwilling to accompany us 
except on certain terms  such as his not being subject to our orders 
and do duty  or to return whenever he chose  as we saw clearly the
source of his hesitation  and knew that it was intended as an obstacle
to our views  we told him that the terms were inadmissible  and that we
could dispense with his services  he had accordingly left us with some
displeasure  since then he had made an advance towards joining us  which
we showed no anxiety to meet  but this morning he sent an apology for
his improper conduct  and agreed to go with us and perform the same
duties as the rest of the corps  we therefore took him again into our
service 

monday 18  the weather was cold and cloudy  the wind from the north  we
were engaged in packing up the goods into eight divisions  so as to
preserve a portion of each in case of accident  we hear that the sioux
have lately attacked a party of assiniboins and knistenaux  near the
assiniboin river  and killed fifty of them 

tuesday 19  some snow fell last night  and this morning was cold  windy 
and cloudy  shahaka and kagohami came down to see us  as did another
indian with a sick child  to whom we gave some medicine  there appears
to be an approaching war  as two parties have already gone from the
minnetarees  and a third is preparing 

wednesday 20  the morning was cold and cloudy  the wind high from the
north  but the afternoon was pleasant  the canoes being finished  four
of them were carried down to the river  at the distance of a mile and a
half from where they were constructed 

thursday 20  the remaining periogues were hauled to the same place  and
all the men except three  who were left to watch them returned to the
fort  on his way down  which was about six miles  captain clarke passed
along the points of the high hills  where he saw large quantities of
pumicestone on the foot  sides and tops of the hills  which had every
appearance of having been at some period on fire  he collected specimens
of the stone itself  the pumicestone  and the hard earth  and on being
put into the furnace the hard earth melted and glazed  the pumicestone
melted  and the hardstone became a pumicestone glazed 




                               chapter vii 

     indian method of attacking the buffaloe on the ice  an enumeration
     of the presents sent to the president of the united states  the
     party are visited by a ricara chief  they leave their encampment 
     and proceed on their journey  description of the little
     missouri  some account of the assiniboins  their mode of burying
     the dead  whiteearth river described  great quantity of salt
     discovered on its banks  yellowstone river described  a particular
     account of the country at the confluence of the yellowstone and
     missouri  description of the missouri  the surrounding country  and
     of the rivers  creeks  islands   c 


friday 22  this was a clear pleasant day  with the wind from the s s w 
we were visited by the second chief of the minnetarees  to whom we gave
a medal and some presents  accompanied by a speech  mr  m kenzie and mr 
laroche also came to see us  they all took their leave next day 

saturday 23  soon after their departure  a brother of the borgne with
other indians came to the fort  the weather was fine  but in the evening
we had the first rain that has fallen during the winter 

sunday 24  the morning cloudy  but the afternoon fair  the wind from the
n e  we are employed in preparing for our journey  this evening swans
and wild geese flew towards the n e 

monday 25  a fine day  the wind s w  the river rose nine inches  and the
ice began breaking away in several places  so as to endanger our canoes
which we are hauling down to the fort 

tuesday 26  the river rose only half an inch  and being choaked up with
ice near the fort  did not begin to run till towards evening  this day
is clear and pleasant 

wednesday 27  the wind is still high from the s w   the ice which is
ocasionally stopped for a few hours is then thrown over shallow
sandbars when the river runs  we had all our canoes brought down  and
were obliged to cauk and pitch very attentively the cracks so common in
cottonwood 

thursday 28  the day is fair  some obstacle above has prevented the ice
from running  our canoes are now nearly ready  and we expect to set out
as soon as the river is sufficiently clear to permit us to pass 

friday 29  the weather clear  and the wind from n w  the obstruction
above gave way this morning  and the ice came down in great quantities 
the river having fallen eleven inches in the course of the last
twenty four hours  we have had few indians at the fort for the last
three or four days  as they are now busy in catching the floating
buffaloe  every spring as the river is breaking up the surrounding
plains are set on fire  and the buffaloe tempted to cross the river in
search of the fresh grass which immediately succeeds to the burning  on
their way they are often insulated on a large cake or mass of ice  which
floats down the river  the indians now select the most favourable points
for attack  and as the buffaloe approaches dart with astonishing agility
across the trembling ice  sometimes pressing lightly a cake of not more
than two feet square  the animal is of course unsteady  and his
footsteps insecure on this new element  so that he can make but little
resistance  and the hunter  who has given him his death wound  paddles
his icy boat to the shore and secures his prey 

saturday 30  the day was clear and pleasant  the wind n w  and the ice
running in great quantities  all our indian presents were again exposed
to the air  and the barge made ready to descend the missouri 

monday 31  early this morning it rained  and the weather continued
cloudy during the day  the river rose nine inches  the ice not running
so much as yesterday  several flocks of geese and ducks fly up the
river 

monday  april 1  1805  this morning there was a thunder storm 
accompanied with large hail  to which succeeded rain for about half an
hour  we availed ourselves of this interval to get all the boats in the
water  at four o clock p m  it began to rain a second time  and
continued till twelve at night  with the exception of a few drops at two
or three different times  this is the first rain we have had since the
15th of october last 

tuesday 2  the wind was high last night and this morning from n w  and
the weather continued cloudy  the mandans killed yesterday twenty one
elk  about fifteen miles below  but they were so poor as to be scarcely
fit for use 

wednesday 3  the weather is pleasant  though there was a white frost and
some ice on the edge of the water  we were all engaged in packing up our
baggage and merchandize 

thursday 4  the day is clear and pleasant  though the wind is high from
n w  we now packed up in different boxes a variety of articles for the
president  which we shall send in the barge  they consisted of a stuffed
male and female antelope with their skeletons  a weasel  three squirrels
from the rocky mountains  the skeleton of the prairie wolf  those of the
white and gray hare  a male and female blaireau  or burrowing dog of the
prairie  with a skeleton of the female  two burrowing squirrels  a white
weasel  and the skin of the louservia  the horns of the mountain ram  or
big horn  a pair of large elk horns  the horns and tail of the
black tailed deer  and a variety of skins  such as those of the red fox 
white hare  martin  yellow bear obtained from the sioux  also  a number
of articles of indian dress  among which was a buffaloe robe 
representing a battle fought about eight years since between the sioux
and ricaras against the mandans and minnetarees  in which the combatants
are represented on horseback  it has of late years excited much
discussion to ascertain the period when the art of painting was first
discovered  how hopeless all researches of this kind are  is evident
from the foregoing fact  it is indebted for its origin to one of the
strongest passions of the human heart  a wish to preserve the features
of a departed friend  or the memory of some glorious exploit  this
inherits equally the bosoms of all men either civilized or savage  such
sketches  rude and imperfect as they are  delineate the predominant
character of the savage nations  if they are peaceable and inoffensive 
the drawings usually consist of local scenery  and their favourite
diversions  if the band are rude and ferocious  we observe tomahawks 
scalpingknives  bows  arrows  and all the engines of destruction  a
mandan bow and quiver of arrows  also some ricara tobacco seed and an
ear of mandan corn  to these were added a box of plants  another of
insects  and three cases containing a burrowing squirrel  a prairie hen 
and four magpies  all alive 

friday  5th  fair and pleasant  but the wind high from the northwest  we
were visited by a number of mandans  and are occupied in loading our
boats in order to proceed on our journey 

saturday  6th  another fine day with a gentle breeze from the south  the
mandans continue to come to the fort  and in the course of the day
informed us of the arrival of a party of ricaras on the other side of
the river  we sent our interpreter to inquire into their reason for
coming  and in the morning 

sunday  7th  he returned with a ricara chief and three of his nation 
the chief  whose name is kagohweto  or brave raven  brought a letter
from mr  tabeau  mentioning the wish of the grand chiefs of the ricaras
to visit the president  and requesting permission for himself and four
men to join our boat when it descends  to which we consented  as it will
then be manned with fifteen hands and be able to defend itself against
the sioux  after presenting the letter  he told us that he was sent with
ten warriors by his nation to arrange their settling near the mandans
and minnetarees  whom they wished to join  that he considered all the
neighboring nations friendly except the sioux  whose persecution they
would no longer withstand  and whom they hoped to repel by uniting with
the tribes in this quarter  he added that the ricaras intended to follow
our advice and live in peace with all nations  and requested that we
would speak in their favour to the assiniboin indians  this we willingly
promised to do  and assured them that their great father would protect
them and no longer suffer the sioux to have good guns  or to injure his
dutiful children  we then gave him a small medal  a certificate of his
good conduct  a carrot of tobacco  and some wampum  with which he
departed for the mandan village well satisfied with his reception 
having made all our arrangements  we left the fort about five o clock in
the afternoon  the party now consisted of thirty two persons  besides
ourselves were serjeants john ordway  nathaniel pryor  and patrick gass 
the privates were william bratton  john colter  john collins  peter
cruzatte  robert frazier  reuben fields  joseph fields  george gibson 
silas goodrich  hugh hall  thomas p  howard  baptiste lapage  francis
labiche  hugh m neal  john potts  john shields  george shannon  john b 
thompson  william werner  alexander willard  richard windsor  joseph
whitehouse  peter wiser  and captain clarke s black servant york  the
two interpreters  were george drewyer and toussaint chaboneau  the wife
of chaboneau also accompanied us with her young child  and we hope may
be useful as an interpreter among the snake indians  she was herself one
of that tribe  but having been taken in war by the minnetarees  by whom
she was sold as a slave to chaboneau  who brought her up and afterwards
married her  one of the mandans likewise embarked with us  in order to
go to the snake indians and obtain a peace with them for his countrymen 
all this party with the baggage was stowed in six small canoes and two
large periogues  we left the fort with fair pleasant weather though the
northwest wind was high  and after making about four miles encamped on
the north side of the missouri  nearly opposite the first mandan
village  at the same time that we took our departure  our barge manned
with seven soldiers  two frenchmen  and mr  gravelines as pilot  sailed
for the united states loaded with our presents and despatches 

monday  8th  the day was clear and cool  the wind from the northwest  so
that we travelled slowly  after breakfasting at the second mandan
village we passed the mahaha at the mouth of knife river  a handsome
stream about eighty yards wide  beyond this we reached the island which
captain clarke had visited on the 30th october  this island has timber
as well as the lowlands on the north  but its distance from the water
had prevented our encamping there during the winter  from the head of
this island we made three and a half miles to a point of wood on the
north  passing a high bluff on the south  and having come about fourteen
miles  in the course of the day one of our boats filled and was near
sinking  we however saved her with the loss of a little biscuit and
powder 

tuesday  april 9  we set off as soon as it was light  and proceeded five
miles to breakfast  passing a low ground on the south  covered with
groves of cottonwood timber  at the distance of six miles  we reached on
the north a hunting camp of minnetarees consisting of thirty lodges  and
built in the usual form of earth and timber  two miles and a quarter
farther  comes in on the same side miry creek  a small stream about ten
yards wide  which  rising in some lakes near the mouse river  passes
through beautiful level fertile plains without timber in a direction
nearly southwest  the banks near its entrance being steep  and rugged on
both sides of the missouri  three miles above this creek we came to a
hunting party of minnetarees  who had prepared a park or inclosure and
were waiting the return of the antelope  this animal  which in the
autumn retires for food and shelter to the black mountains during the
winter  recross the river at this season of the year  and spread
themselves through the plains on the north of the missouri  we halted
and smoked a short time with them  and then proceeded on through
handsome plains on each side of the river  and encamped at the distance
of twenty three and a half miles on the north side  the day was clear
and pleasant  the wind high from the south  but afterwards changed to a
western steady breeze  the bluffs which we passed to day are upwards of
one hundred feet high  composed of a mixture of yellow clay and sand 
with many horizontal strata of carbonated wood resembling pit coal  from
one to five feet in depth  and scattered through the bluff at different
elevations  some as high as eighty feet above the water  the hills along
the river are broken  and present every appearance of having been burned
at some former period  great quantities of pumicestone and lava or
rather earth  which seems to have been boiled and then hardened by
exposure  being seen in many parts of these hills where they are broken
and washed down into gullies by the rain and melting snow  a great
number of brants pass up the river  there are some of them perfectly
white  except the large feathers of the first and second joint of the
wing which are black  though in every other characteristic they resemble
common gray brant  we also saw but could not procure an animal that
burrows in the ground  and similar in every respect to the burrowing
squirrel  except that it is only one third of its size  this may be the
animal whose works we have often seen in the plains and prairies  they
resemble the labours of the salamander in the sand hills of south
carolina and georgia  and like him  the animals rarely come above
ground  they consist of a little hillock of ten or twelve pounds of
loose ground which would seem to have been reversed from a pot  though
no aperture is seen through which it could have been thrown  on removing
gently the earth  you discover that the soil has been broken in a circle
of about an inch and a half diameter  where the ground is looser though
still no opening is perceptible  when we stopped for dinner the squaw
went out  and after penetrating with a sharp stick the holes of the
mice  near some drift wood  brought to us a quantity of wild artichokes 
which the mice collect and hoard in large numbers  the root is white  of
an ovate form  from one to three inches long  and generally of the size
of a man s finger  and two  four  and sometimes six roots are attached
to a single stalk  its flavour as well as the stalk which issues from it
resemble those of the jerusalem artichoke  except that the latter is
much larger  a large beaver was caught in a trap last night  and the
musquitoes begin to trouble us 

wednesday 10  we again set off early with clear pleasant weather  and
halted about ten for breakfast  above a sandbank which was falling in 
and near a small willow island  on both sides of the missouri  after
ascending the hills near the water  one fertile unbroken plain extends
itself as far as the eye can reach  without a solitary tree or shrub 
except in moist situations or in the steep declivities of hills where
they are sheltered from the ravages of fire  at the distance of twelve
miles we reached the lower point of a bluff on the south  which is in
some parts on fire and throws out quantities of smoke which has a strong
sulphurous smell  the coal and other appearances in the bluffs being
like those described yesterday  at one o clock we overtook three
frenchmen who left the fort a few days before us  in order to make the
first attempt on this river of hunting beaver  which they do by means of
traps  their efforts promise to be successful for they have already
caught twelve which are finer than any we have ever seen  they mean to
accompany us as far as the yellowstone river in order to obtain our
protection against the assiniboins who might attack them  in the evening
we encamped on a willow point to the south opposite to a bluff  above
which a small creek falls in  and just above a remarkable bend in the
river to the southwest  which we called the little basin  the low
grounds which we passed to day possess more timber than is usual  and
are wider  the current is moderate  at least not greater than that of
the ohio in high tides  the banks too fall in but little  so that the
navigation comparatively with that lower down the missouri is safe and
easy  we were enabled to make eighteen and a half miles  we saw the
track of a large white bear  there were also a herd of antelopes in the
plains  the geese and swan are now feeding in considerable quantities on
the young grass in the low prairies  we shot a prairie hen  and a bald
eagle of which there were many nests in the tall cottonwood trees  but
could procure neither of two elk which were in the plain  our old
companions the musquitoes have renewed their visit  and gave us much
uneasiness 

thursday  11th  we set out at daylight  and after passing bare and
barren hills on the south  and a plain covered with timber on the north 
breakfasted at five miles distance  here we were regaled with a deer
brought in by the hunters  which was very acceptable as we had been for
several days without fresh meat  the country between this and fort
mandan being so frequently disturbed by hunters that the game has become
scarce  we then proceeded with a gentle breeze from the south which
carried the periogues on very well  the day was however so warm that
several of the men worked with no clothes except round the waist  which
is the less inconvenient as we are obliged to wade in some places owing
to the shallowness of the river  at seven miles we reached a large
sandbar making out from the north  we again stopped for dinner  after
which we went on to a small plain on the north covered with cottonwood
where we encamped  having made nineteen miles  the country around is
much the same as that we passed yesterday  on the sides of the hills 
and even on the banks of the rivers  as well as on the sandbars  is a
white substance which appears in considerable quantities on the surface
of the earth  and tastes like a mixture of common salt with glauber
salts  many of the streams which come from the foot of the hills  are so
strongly impregnated with this substance  that the water has an
unpleasant taste and a purgative effect  a beaver was caught last night
by one of the frenchmen  we killed two geese  and saw some cranes  the
largest bird of that kind common to the missouri and mississippi  and
perfectly white except the large feathers on the two first joints of the
wing which are black  under a bluff opposite to our encampment we
discovered some indians with horses  whom we supposed were minnetarees 
but the width of the river prevented our speaking to them 

friday  12th  we set off early and passed a high range of hills on the
south side  our periogues being obliged to go over to the south in order
to avoid a sandbank which was rapidly falling in  at six miles we came
to at the lower side of the entrance of the little missouri  where we
remained during the day for the purpose of making celestial
observations  this river empties itself on the south side of the
missouri  one thousand six hundred and ninety three miles from its
confluence with the mississippi  it rises to the west of the black
mountains  across the northern extremity of which it finds a narrow
rapid passage along high perpendicular banks  then seeks the missouri in
a northeastern direction  through a broken country with highlands bare
of timber  and the low grounds particularly supplied with cottonwood 
elm  small ash  box  alder  and an undergrowth of willow  redwood 
sometimes called red or swamp willow  the redberry and chokecherry  in
its course it passes near the northwest side of the turtle mountain 
which is said to be only twelve or fifteen miles from its mouth in a
straight line a little to the south of west  so that both the little
missouri and knife river have been laid down too far southwest  it
enters the missouri with a bold current  and is one hundred and
thirty four yards wide  but its greatest depth is two feet and a half 
and this joined to its rapidity and its sandbars  make the navigation
difficult except for canoes  which may ascend it for a considerable
distance  at the mouth  and as far as we could discern from the hills
between the two rivers about three miles from their junction  the
country is much broken  the soil consisting of a deep rich dark coloured
loam  intermixed with a small proportion of fine sand and covered
generally with a short grass resembling blue grass  in its colour  the
nature of its bed  and its general appearance  it resembles so much the
missouri as to induce a belief that the countries they water are similar
in point of soil  from the mandan villages to this place the country is
hilly and irregular  with the same appearance of glauber salts and
carbonated wood  the low grounds smooth  sandy  and partially covered
with cottonwood and small ash  at some distance back there are extensive
plains of a good soil  but without timber or water 

we found great quantities of small onions which grow single  the bulb of
an oval form  white  about the size of a bullet with a leaf resembling
that of the chive  on the side of a neighbouring hill  there is a
species of dwarf cedar  it spreads its limbs along the surface of the
earth  which it almost conceals by its closeness and thickness  and is
sometimes covered by it  having always a number of roots on the under
side  while on the upper are a quantity of shoots which with their
leaves seldom rise higher than six or eight inches  it is an evergreen 
its leaf more delicate than that of the common cedar  though the taste
and smell is the same 

the country around has been so recently hunted that the game are
extremely shy  so that a white rabbit  two beaver  a deer  and a bald
eagle were all that we could procure  the weather had been clear  warm 
and pleasant in the morning  but about three we had a squall of high
wind and rain with some thunder  which lasted till after sunset when it
again cleared off 

saturday 13  we set out at sunrise  and at nine o clock having the wind
in our favour went on rapidly past a timbered low ground on the south 
and a creek on the north at the distance of nine miles  which we called
onion creek  from the quantity of that plant which grows in the plains
near it  this creek is about sixteen yards wide at a mile and a half
above its mouth  it discharges more water than is usual for creeks of
that size in this country  but the whole plain which it waters is
totally destitute of timber  the missouri itself widens very remarkably
just above the junction with the little missouri  immediately at the
entrance of the latter  it is not more than two hundred yards wide  and
so shallow that it may be passed in canoes with setting poles  while a
few miles above it is upwards of a mile in width  ten miles beyond onion
creek we came to another  discharging itself on the north in the centre
of a deep bend  on ascending it for about a mile and a half  we found it
to be the discharge of a pond or small lake  which seemed to have been
once the bed of the missouri  near this lake were the remains of
forty three temporary lodges which seem to belong to the assiniboins 
who are now on the river of the same name  a great number of swan and
geese were also in it  and from this circumstance we named the creek
goose creek  and the lake by the same name  these geese we observe do
not build their nests on the ground or in sandbars  but in the tops of
lofty cottonwood trees  we saw some elk and buffaloe to day but at too
great a distance to obtain any of them  though a number of the carcases
of the latter animal are strewed along the shores  having fallen through
the ice  and been swept along when the river broke up  more bald eagles
are seen on this part of the missouri than we have previously met with 
the small or common hawk  common in most parts of the united states  are
also found here  great quantities of geese are feeding in the prairies 
and one flock of white brant or goose with black wings  and some gray
brant with them pass up river  and from their flight they seem to
proceed much farther to the northwest  we killed two antelopes which
were very lean  and caught last night two beaver  the french hunters who
had procured seven  thinking the neighborhood of the little missouri a
convenient hunting ground for that animal  remained behind there  in
the evening we encamped in a beautiful plain on the north thirty feet
above the river  having made twenty two and a half miles 

sunday 14  we set off early with pleasant and fair weather  a dog joined
us  which we suppose had strayed from the assiniboin camp on the lake 
at two and a half miles we passed timbered low grounds and a small
creek  in these low grounds are several uninhabited lodges built with
the boughs of the elm  and the remains of two recent encampments  which
from the hoops of small kegs found in them we judged could belong to
assiniboins only  as they are the only missouri indians who use
spirituous liquors  of these they are so passionately fond that it forms
their chief inducement to visit the british on the assiniboin  to whom
they barter for kegs of rum their dried and pounded meat  their grease 
and the skins of large and small wolves  and small foxes  the dangerous
exchange is transported to their camps with their friends and relations 
and soon exhausted in brutal intoxication  so far from considering
drunkenness as disgraceful  the women and children are permitted and
invited to share in these excesses with their husbands and fathers  who
boast how often their skill and industry as hunters has supplied them
with the means of intoxication  in this  as in their other habits and
customs  they resemble the sioux from whom they are descended  the trade
with the assiniboins and knistenaux is encouraged by the british 
because it procures provision for their  engages  on their return from
rainy lake to the english river and the athabasky country where they
winter  these men being obliged during that voyage to pass rapidly
through a country but scantily supplied with game  we halted for dinner
near a large village of burrowing squirrels  who we observe generally
select a southeasterly exposure  though they are sometimes found in the
plains  at ten and a quarter miles we came to the lower point of an
island  which from the day of our arrival there we called sunday
island  here the river washes the bases of the hills on both sides and
above the island  which with its sandbar extends a mile and a half  two
small creeks fall in from the south  the uppermost of these  which is
the largest  we called chaboneau s creek  after our interpreter who once
encamped on it several weeks with a party of indians  beyond this no
white man had ever been except two frenchmen  one of whom lapage is with
us  and who having lost their way straggled a few miles further  though
to what point we could not ascertain  about a mile and a half beyond
this island we encamped on a point of woodland on the north  having made
in all fourteen miles 

the assiniboins have so recently left the river that game is scarce and
shy  one of the hunters shot at an otter last evening  a buffaloe too
was killed  and an elk  both so poor as to be almost unfit for use  two
white bear were also seen  and a muskrat swimming across the river  the
river continues wide and of about the same rapidity as the ordinary
current of the ohio  the low grounds are wide  the moister parts
containing timber  the upland extremely broken  without wood  and in
some places seem as if they had slipped down in masses of several acres
in surface  the mineral appearances of salts  coal  and sulphur  with
the burnt hill and pumicestone continue  and a bituminous water about
the colour of strong lye  with the taste of glauber salts and a slight
tincture of allum  many geese were feeding in the prairies  and a number
of magpies who build their nest much like those of the blackbird in
trees  and composed of small sticks  leaves and grass  open at top  the
egg is of a bluish brown color  freckled with reddish brown spots  we
also killed a large hooting owl resembling that of the united states 
except that it was more booted and clad with feathers  on the hills are
many aromatic herbs  resembling in taste  smell and appearance the sage 
hysop  wormwood  southern wood  juniper and dwarf cedar  a plant also
about two or three feet high  similar to the camphor in smell and
taste  and another plant of the same size  with a long  narrow  smooth 
soft leaf  of an agreeable smell and flavour  which is a favourite food
of the antelope  whose necks are often perfumed by rubbing against it 

monday 15  we proceeded under a fine breeze from the south  and clear
pleasant weather  at seven miles we reached the lower point of an island
in a bend to the south  which is two miles in length  captain clarke 
who went about nine miles northward from the river reached the high
grounds  which  like those we have seen  are level plains without
timber  here he observed a number of drains  which descending from the
hills pursue a northeast course  and probably empty into the mouse
river  a branch of the assiniboin  which from indian accounts approaches
very near to the missouri at this place  like all the rivulets of this
neighbourhood these drains were so strongly impregnated with mineral
salts that they are not fit to drink  he saw also the remains of several
camps of assiniboins  the low grounds on both sides of the river are
extensive  rich  and level  in a little pond on the north  we heard for
the first time this season the croaking of frogs  which exactly
resembles that of the small frogs in the united states  there are also
in these plains great quantities of geese  and many of the grouse  or
prairie hen  as they are called by the n w  company traders  the note of
the male  as far as words can represent it  is cook  cook  cook  coo 
coo  coo  the first part of which both male and female use when flying 
the male too drums with his wings when he flies in the same way  though
not so loud as the pheasant  they appear to be mating  some deer  elk 
and goats were in the low grounds  and buffaloe on the sand beaches  but
they were uncommonly shy  we also saw a black bear  and two white ones 
at fifteen miles we passed on the north side a small creek twenty yards
wide  which we called goatpen creek  from a park or enclosure for the
purpose of catching that animal  which those who went up the creek
found  and which we presume to have been left by the assiniboins  its
water is impregnated with mineral salts  and the country through which
it flows consists of wide and very fertile plains  but without any
trees  we encamped at the distance of twenty three miles  on a sandpoint
to the south  we passed in the evening a rock in the middle of the
river  the channel of which a little above our camp  is confined within
eighty yards 

tuesday 16  the morning was clear  the wind light from the s e  the
country presents the same appearance of low plains and meadows on the
river  bounded a few miles back by broken hills  which end in high level
fertile lands  the quantity of timber is however increasing  the
appearance of minerals continues as usual  and to day we found several
stones which seemed to have been wood  first carbonated and then
petrified by the water of the missouri  which has the same effect on
many vegetable substances  there is indeed reason to believe that the
strata of coal in the hills cause the fire and appearances which they
exhibit of being burned  whenever these marks present themselves in the
bluffs on the river  the coal is seldom seen  and when found in the
neighborhood of the strata of burnt earth  the coal with the sand and
sulphurous matter usually accompanying it  is precisely at the same
height and nearly of the same thickness with those strata  we passed
three small creeks or rather runs  which rise in the hills to the north 
numbers of geese  and few ducks chiefly of the mallard and bluewinged
teal  many buffaloe  elk and deer were also observed  and in the
timbered low grounds this morning we were surprised to observe a great
quantity of old hornets  nests  we encamped in a point of woods on the
south  having come eighteen miles  though the circuits which we were
obliged to make around sandbars very much increased the real distance 

wednesday  april 17  we set off early  the weather being fine  and the
wind so favourable as to enable us to sail the greater part of the
course  at ten and three quarter miles we passed a creek ten yards wide
on the south  at eighteen miles a little run on the north  and at night
encamped in a woody point on the south  we had travelled twenty six
miles through a country similar to that of yesterday  except that there
were greater appearances of burnt hills  furnishing large quantities of
lava and pumicestone  of the last of which we observe some pieces
floating down the river  as we had previously done  as low as the little
missouri  in all the copses of wood are the remains of the assiniboin
encampments  around us are great quantities of game  such as herds of
buffaloe  elk  antelopes  some deer and wolves  the tracks of bears  a
curlue was also seen  and we obtained three beaver  the flesh of which
is more relished by the men than any other food which we have  just
before we encamped we saw some tracks of indians  who had passed
twenty four hours before  and left four rafts  and whom we supposed to
be a band of assiniboins on their return from war against the indians on
the rocky mountains 

thursday 18  we had again a pleasant day  and proceeded on with a
westerly wind  which however changed to n w  and blew so hard that we
were obliged to stop at one o clock and remain four hours  when it
abated and we then continued our course 

we encamped about dark on a woody bank having made thirteen miles  the
country presented the usual variety of highlands interspersed with rich
plains  in one of these we observed a species of pea bearing a yellow
flower  which is now in blossom  the leaf and stalk resembling the
common pea  it seldom rises higher than six inches  and the root is
perennial  on the rose bushes we also saw a quantity of the hair of the
buffaloe  which had become perfectly white by exposure  and resembled
the wool of the sheep  except that it was much finer and more soft and
silky  a buffaloe which we killed yesterday had shed his long hair  and
that which remained was about two inches long  thick  fine  and would
have furnished five pounds of wool  of which we have no doubt an
excellent cloth may be made  our game to day was a beaver  a deer  an
elk  and some geese  the river has been crooked all day and bearing
towards the south 

on the hills we observed considerable quantities of dwarf juniper  which
seldom grows higher than three feet  we killed in the course of the day
an elk  three geese and a beaver  the beaver on this part of the
missouri are in greater quantities  larger and fatter  and their fur is
more abundant and of a darker colour than any we had hitherto seen 
their favourite food seems to be the bark of the cottonwood and willow 
as we have seen no other species of tree that has been touched by them 
and these they gnaw to the ground through a diameter of twenty inches 

the next day  friday  19th  the wind was so high from northwest that we
could not proceed  but being less violent on

saturday  20th  we set off about seven o clock  and had nearly lost one
of the canoes as we left the shore  by the falling in of a large part of
the bank  the wind too became again so strong that we could scarcely
make one mile an hour  and the sudden squalls so dangerous to the small
boats  that we stopped for the night among some willows on the north 
not being able to advance more than six and a half miles  in walking
through the neighbouring plains we found a fine fertile soil covered
with cottonwood  some box  alder  ash  red elm  and an undergrowth of
willow  rosebushes  honeysuckle  red willow  gooseberry  currant  and
serviceberries  and along the foot of the hills great quantities of
hysop  our hunters procured elk and deer which are now lean  and six
beaver which are fatter and more palatable  along the plain there were
also some indian camps  near one of these was a scaffold about seven
feet high  on which were two sleds with their harness  and under it the
body of a female  carefully wrapped in several dressed buffaloe skins 
near it lay a bag made of buffaloe skin  containing a pair of moccasins 
some red and blue paint  beaver s nails  scrapers for dressing hides 
some dried roots  several plaits of sweet grass  and a small quantity of
mandan tobacco  these things as well as the body itself had probably
fallen down by accident  as the custom is to place them on the scaffold 
at a little distance was the body of a dog not yet decayed  who had met
this reward for having dragged thus far in the sled the corpse of his
mistress  to whom according to the indian usage he had been sacrificed 

sunday  21st  last night there was a hard white frost  and this morning
the weather cold  but clear and pleasant  in the course of the day
however it became cloudy and the wind rose  the country is of the same
description as within the few last days  we saw immense quantities of
buffaloe  elk  deer  antelopes  geese  and some swan and ducks  out of
which we procured three deer  four buffaloe calves  which last are equal
in flavour to the most delicious veal  also two beaver  and an otter  we
passed one large and two small creeks on the south side  and reached at
sixteen miles the mouth of whiteearth river  coming in from the north 
this river before it reaches the low grounds near the missouri  is a
fine bold stream sixty yards wide  and is deep and navigable  but it is
so much choked up at the entrance by the mud of the missouri  that its
mouth is not more than ten yards wide  its course  as far as we could
discern from the neighbouring hills  is nearly due north  passing
through a beautiful and fertile valley  though without a tree or bush of
any description  half a mile beyond this river we encamped on the same
side below a point of highland  which from its appearance we call cut
bluff 

monday  22d  the day clear and cold  we passed a high bluff on the north
and plains on the south  in which were large herds of buffaloe  till
breakfast  when the wind became so strong ahead that we proceeded with
difficulty even with the aid of the towline  some of the party now
walked across to the whiteearth river  which here at the distance of
four miles from its mouth approaches very near to the missouri  it
contains more water than is usual in streams of the same size at this
season  with steep banks about ten or twelve feet high  and the water is
much clearer than that of the missouri  the salts which have been
mentioned as common on the missouri  are here so abundant that in many
places the ground appears perfectly white  and from this circumstance it
may have derived its name  it waters an open country and is navigable
almost to its source  which is not far from the saskaskawan  and judging
from its size and course  it is probable that it extends as far north as
the fiftieth degree of latitude  after much delay in consequence of the
high wind  we succeeded in making eleven miles  and encamped in a low
ground on the south covered with cottonwood and rabbitberries  the hills
of the missouri near this place exhibit large irregular broken masses of
rocks and stones  some of which  although two hundred feet above the
water  seem at some remote period to have been subject to its influence 
being apparently worn smooth by the agitation of the water  these rocks
and stones consist of white and gray granite  a brittle black rock 
flint  limestone  freestone  some small specimens of an excellent
pebble  and occasionally broken stratas of a black coloured stone like
petrified wood  which make good whetstones  the usual appearances of
coal  or carbonated wood  and pumicestone still continue  the coal being
of a better quality and when burnt affords a hot and lasting fire 
emitting very little smoke or flame  there are huge herds of deer  elk 
buffaloe  and antelopes in view of us  the buffaloe are not so shy as
the rest  for they suffer us to approach within one hundred yards before
they run  and then stop and resume their pasture at a very short
distance  the wolves to day pursued a herd of them  and at length caught
a calf that was unable to keep up with the rest  the mothers on these
occasions defending their young as long as they can retreat as fast as
the herd  but seldom returning any distance to seek for them 

tuesday 23  a clear and pleasant morning  but at nine o clock the wind
became so high that the boats were in danger of upsetting  we therefore
were forced to stop at a place of safety till about five in the
afternoon  when the wind being lower we proceeded and encamped on the
north at the distance of thirteen and a half miles  the party on shore
brought us a buffaloe calf and three blacktailed deer  the sand on the
river has the same appearances as usual  except that the quantity of
wood increases 

wednesday 24  the wind blew so high during the whole day that we were
unable to move  such indeed was its violence  that although we were
sheltered by high timber the waves wet many articles in the boats  the
hunters went out and returned with four deer  two elk  and some young
wolves of the small kind  the party are very much afflicted with sore
eyes  which we presume are occasioned by the vast quantities of sand
which are driven from the sandbars in such clouds as often to hide from
us the view of the opposite bank  the particles of this sand are so fine
and light that it floats for miles in the air like a column of thick
smoke  and is so penetrating that nothing can be kept free from it  and
we are compelled to eat  drink  and breathe it very copiously  to the
same cause we attribute the disorder of one of our watches  although her
cases are double and tight  since without any defect in its works  that
we can discover  it will not run for more than a few minutes without
stopping 

thursday 25  the wind moderated this morning  but was still high  we
therefore set out early  the weather being so cold that the water froze
on the oars as we rowed  and about ten o clock the wind increased so
much that we were obliged to stop  this detention from the wind and the
reports from our hunters of the crookedness of the river  induced us to
believe that we were at no great distance from the yellowstone river  in
order therefore to prevent delay as much as possible  captain lewis
determined to go on by land in search of that river  and make the
necessary observations  so as to be enabled to proceed on immediately
after the boats should join him  he therefore landed about eleven
o clock on the south side  accompanied by four men  the boats were
prevented from going until five in the afternoon  when they went on a
few miles further and encamped for the night at the distance of fourteen
and a half miles 

friday 26  we continued our voyage in the morning and by twelve o clock
encamped at eight miles distance  at the junction of the missouri and
yellowstone rivers  where we were soon joined by captain lewis 

on leaving us yesterday he pursued his route along the foot of the
hills  which he ascended at the distance of eight miles  from these the
wide plains watered by the missouri and the yellowstone spread
themselves before the eye  occasionally varied with the wood of the
banks  enlivened by the irregular windings of the two rivers  and
animated by vast herds of buffaloe  deer  elk  and antelope  the
confluence of the two rivers was concealed by the wood  but the
yellowstone itself was only two miles distant to the south  he therefore
descended the hills and encamped on the bank of the river  having killed
as he crossed the plain four buffaloes  the deer alone are shy and
retire to the woods  but the elk  antelope  and buffaloe suffered him to
approach them without alarm  and often followed him quietly for some
distance  this morning he sent a man up the river to examine it  while
he proceeded down to the junction  the ground on the lower side of the
yellowstone near its mouth  is flat  and for about a mile seems to be
subject to inundation  while that at the point or junction  as well as
on the opposite side of the missouri  is at the usual height of ten or
eighteen feet above the water  and therefore not overflown  there is
more timber in the neighbourhood of this place  and on the missouri  as
far below as the whiteearth river  than on any other part of the
missouri on this side of the chayenne  the timber consists principally
of cottonwood  with some small elm  ash  and box alder  on the sandbars
and along the margin of the river grows the small leafed willow  in the
low grounds adjoining are scattered rosebushes three or four feet high 
the redberry  serviceberry and redwood  the higher plains are either
immediately on the river  in which case they are generally timbered  and
have an undergrowth like that of the low grounds  with the addition of
the broad leafed willow  gooseberry  chokecherry  purple currant  and
honeysuckle  or they are between the low grounds and the hills  and for
the most part without wood or any thing except large quantities of wild
hysop  this plant rises about two feet high  and like the willow of the
sandbars is a favourite food of the buffaloe  elk  deer  grouse 
porcupine  hare  and rabbit  this river which had been known to the
french as the roche jaune  or as we have called it the yellowstone 
rises according to indian information in the rocky mountains  its
sources are near those of the missouri and the platte  and it may be
navigated in canoes almost to its head  it runs first through a
mountainous country  but in many parts fertile and well timbered  it
then waters a rich delightful land  broken into vallies and meadows  and
well supplied with wood and water till it reaches near the missouri open
meadows and low grounds  sufficiently timbered on its borders  in the
upper country its course is represented as very rapid  but during the
two last and largest portions  its current is much more gentle than that
of the missouri  which it resembles also in being turbid though with
less sediment  the man who was sent up the river  reported in the
evening that he had gone about eight miles  that during that distance
the river winds on both sides of a plain four or five miles wide  that
the current was gentle and much obstructed by sandbars  that at five
miles he had met with a large timbered island  three miles beyond which
a creek falls in on the s e  above a high bluff  in which are several
strata of coal  the country as far as he could discern  resembled that
of the missouri  and in the plain he met several of the bighorn animals 
but they were too shy to be obtained  the bed of the yellowstone  as we
observed it near the mouth  is composed of sand and mud  without a stone
of any kind  just above the confluence we measured the two rivers  and
found the bed of the missouri five hundred and twenty yards wide  the
water occupying only three hundred and thirty  and the channel deep 
while the yellowstone  including its sandbar  occupied eight hundred and
fifty eight yards  with two hundred and ninety seven yards of water  the
deepest part of the channel is twelve feet  but the river is now falling
and seems to be nearly at its summer height 

april 27  we left the mouth of the yellowstone  from the point of
junction a wood occupies the space between the two rivers  which at the
distance of a mile comes within two hundred and fifty yards of each
other  there a beautiful low plain commences  and widening as the rivers
recede  extends along each of them for several miles  rising about half
a mile from the missouri into a plain twelve feet higher than itself 
the low plain is a few inches above high water mark  and where it joins
the higher plain there is a channel of sixty or seventy yards in width 
through which a part of the missouri when at its greatest height passes
into the yellowstone  at two and a half miles above the junction and
between the high and low plain is a small lake  two hundred yards wide 
extending for a mile parallel with the missouri along the edge of the
upper plain  at the lower extremity of this lake  about four hundred
yards from the missouri  and twice that distance from the yellowstone 
is a situation highly eligible for a trading establishment  it is in the
high plain which extends back three miles in width  and seven or eight
miles in length  along the yellowstone  where it is bordered by an
extensive body of woodland  and along the missouri with less breadth 
till three miles above it is circumscribed by the hills within a space
four yards in width  a sufficient quantity of limestone for building may
easily be procured near the junction of the rivers  it does not lie in
regular stratas  but is in large irregular masses  of a light colour and
apparently of an excellent quality  game too is very abundant  and as
yet quite gentle  above all  its elevation recommends it as preferable
to the land at the confluence of the rivers  which their variable
channels may render very insecure  the n w  wind rose so high at eleven
o clock  that we were obliged to stop till about four in the afternoon 
when we proceeded till dusk  on the south a beautiful plain separates
the two rivers  till at about six miles there is a timbered piece of low
ground  and a little above it bluffs  where the country rises gradually
from the river  the situations on the north more high and open  we
encamped on that side  the wind  the sand which it raised  and the
rapidity of the current having prevented our advancing more than eight
miles  during the latter part of the day the river becomes wider and
crowded with sandbars  although the game is in such plenty we kill only
what is necessary for our subsistence  for several days past we have
seen great numbers of buffaloe lying dead along the shore  and some of
them partly devoured by the wolves  they have either sunk through the
ice during the winter  or been drowned in attempting to cross  or else 
after crossing to some high bluff  found themselves too much exhausted
either to ascend or swim back again  and perished for want of food  in
this situation we found several small parties of them  there are geese
too in abundance  and more bald eagles than we have hitherto observed 
the nests of these last being always accompanied by those of two or
three magpies  who are their inseparable attendants 




                              chapter viii 

     unusual appearance of salt  the formidable character of the white
     bear  porcupine river described  beautiful appearance of the
     surrounding country  immense quantities of game  milk river
     described  extraordinary character of bigdry river  an instance of
     uncommon tenacity of life in a white bear  narrow escape of one of
     the party from that animal  a still more remarkable
     instance  muscleshell river described 


sunday 28  the day was clear and pleasant  and the wind having shifted
to southeast  we could employ our sails  and went twenty four miles to a
low ground on the north opposite to steep bluffs  the country on both
sides is much broken  the hills approaching nearer to the river  and
forming bluffs  some of a white and others of a red colour  and
exhibiting the usual appearances of minerals  and some burnt hills
though without any pumicestone  the salts are in greater quantities than
usual  and the banks and sandbars are covered with a white incrustation
like frost  the low grounds are level  fertile and partially timbered 
but are not so wide as for a few days past  the woods are now green  but
the plains and meadows seem to have less verdure than those below  the
only streams which we met to day are two small runs on the north and one
on the south  which rise in the neighbouring hills  and have very little
water  at the distance of eighteen miles the missouri makes a
considerable bend to the southeast  the game is very abundant  the
common  and mule or blacktailed deer  elk  buffaloe  antelope  brown
bear  beaver  and geese  the beaver have committed great devastation
among the trees  one of which  nearly three feet in diameter  has been
gnawed through by them 

monday 29  we proceeded early with a moderate wind  captain lewis who
was on shore with one hunter met about eight o clock two white bears  of
the strength and ferocity of this animal  the indians had given us
dreadful accounts  they never attack him but in parties of six or eight
persons  and even then are often defeated with the loss of one or more
of the party  having no weapons but bows and arrows  and the bad guns
with which the traders supply them  they are obliged to approach very
near to the bear  and as no wound except through the head or heart is
mortal  they frequently fall a sacrifice if they miss their aim  he
rather attacks than avoids a man  and such is the terror which he has
inspired  that the indians who go in quest of him paint themselves and
perform all the superstitious rites customary when they make war on a
neighbouring nation  hitherto those we had seen did not appear desirous
of encountering us  but although to a skilful rifleman the danger is
very much diminished  yet the white bear is still a terrible animal  on
approaching these two  both captain lewis and the hunter fired and each
wounded a bear  one of them made his escape  the other turned upon
captain lewis and pursued him seventy or eighty yards  but being badly
wounded he could not run so fast as to prevent him from reloading his
piece  which he again aimed at him  and a third shot from the hunter
brought him to the ground  he was a male not quite full grown  and
weighed about three hundred pounds  the legs are somewhat longer than
those of the black bear  and the talons and tusks much larger and
longer  the testicles are also placed much farther forward and suspended
in separate pouches from two to four inches asunder  while those of the
black bear are situated back between the thighs and in a single pouch
like those of the dog  its colour is a yellowish brown  the eyes small 
black  and piercing  the front of the fore legs near the feet is usually
black  and the fur is finer  thicker  and deeper than that of the black
bear  add to which  it is a more furious animal  and very remarkable for
the wounds which it will bear without dying 

we are surrounded with deer  elk  buffaloe  antelopes  and their
companions the wolves  who have become more numerous and make great
ravages among them  the hills are here much more rough and high  and
almost overhang the banks of the river  there are greater appearances of
coal than we have hitherto seen  the stratas of it being in some places
six feet thick  and there are stratas of burnt earth  which are always
on the same level with those of coal  in the evening after coming
twenty five miles we encamped at the entrance of a river which empties
itself into a bend on the north side of the missouri  this stream which
we called martha s river  is about fifty yards wide  with water for
fifteen yards  the banks are of earth  and steep  though not high  and
the bed principally of mud  captain clarke  who ascended it for three
miles  found that it continued of the same width with a gentle current 
and pursuing its course about north 30 degrees west  through an
extensive  fertile  and beautiful valley  but without a single tree  the
water is clear  and has a brownish yellow tint  at this place the
highlands which yesterday and to day had approached so near the river
became lower  and receding from the water left a valley seven or eight
miles wide 

tuesday 30  the wind was high from the north during last evening and
continued so this morning  we however continued  and found the river
more winding than usual and with a number of sand islands and bars  on
one of which last we encamped at the distance of twenty four miles  the
low grounds are fertile and extensive but with very little timber  and
that cottonwood  very bad of its kind  being too small for planks  and
broken and dead at the top and unsound in the centre of the trunk  we
passed some ancient lodges of driftwood which do not appear to have been
lately inhabited  the game continues abundant  we killed the largest
male elk we have yet seen  on placing it in its natural erect position 
we found that it measured five feet three inches from the point of the
hoof to the top of the shoulder  the antelopes are yet lean and the
females are with young  this fleet and quick sighted animal is generally
the victim of its curiosity  when they first see the hunters they run
with great velocity  if he lies down on the ground and lifts up his arm 
his hat  or his foot  the antelope returns on a light trot to look at
the object  and sometimes goes and returns two or three times till they
approach within reach of the rifle  so too they sometimes leave their
flock to go and look at the wolves who crouch down  and if the antelope
be frightened at first repeat the same manoeuvre  and sometimes relieve
each other till they decoy it from the party when they seize it  but
generally the wolves take them as they are crossing the rivers  for
although swift of foot they are not good swimmers 

wednesday  may 1  the wind was in our favour and we were enabled to use
the sails till twelve o clock  when the wind became so high and squally
that we were forced to come to at the distance of ten miles on the
south  in a low ground stocked with cottonwood  and remain there during
the day  one of the canoes being separated from us  and not able to
cross over in consequence of the high waves  the country around is more
pleasant than that through which we had passed for several days  the
hills being lower  the low grounds wider and better supplied with
timber  which consists principally of cottonwood  the undergrowth willow
on the banks and sandbars  rosebushes  redwillow  and the broad leafed
willow in the low plains  while the high country on both sides is one
extensive plain without wood  though the soil is a dark  rich  mellow
loam  our hunters killed a buffaloe  an elk  a goat  and two beaver  and
also a bird of the plover kind 

thursday  2d  the wind continued high during the night  and at daylight
it began to snow and did not stop till ten o clock  when the ground was
covered an inch deep  forming a striking contrast with the vegetation
which is now considerably advanced  some flowers having put forth  and
the cottonwood leaves as large as a dollar  the wind lulled about five
o clock in the afternoon  and we then proceeded along wide fertile low
grounds and high level plains  and encamped at the distance of four
miles  our game to day was deer  elk  and buffaloe  we also procured
three beaver who are quite gentle  as they have not been hunted  but
when the hunters are in pursuit they never leave their huts during the
day  this animal we esteem a great delicacy  particularly the tail 
which when boiled resembles in flavor the flesh tongues and sounds of
the codfish  and is generally so large as to afford a plentiful meal for
two men  one of the hunters in passing near an old indian camp found
several yards of scarlet cloth  suspended on the bough of a tree as a
sacrifice to the deity by the assiniboins  the custom of making these
offerings being common among that people as indeed among all the indians
on the missouri  the air was sharp this evening  the water froze on the
oars as we rowed  and in the morning 

friday  3d  the weather became quite cold  the ice was a quarter of an
inch thick in the kettle  and the snow still continued on the hills
though it has melted from the plains  the wind too continued high from
the west  but not so violently as to prevent our going on  at two miles
from our encampment we passed a curious collection of bushes about
thirty feet high and ten or twelve in diameter  tied in the form of a
fascine and standing on end in the middle of the low ground  this too we
supposed to have been left by the indians as a religious sacrifice  at
twelve o clock the usual hour we halted for dinner  the low grounds on
the river are much wider than common  sometimes extending from five to
nine miles to the highlands  which are much lower than heretofore  not
being more than fifty or sixty feet above the lower plain  through all
this valley traces of the ancient bed of the river are every where
visible  and since the hills have become lower  the stratas of coal 
burnt earth  and pumicestone have in a great measure ceased  there
being in fact none to day  at the distance of fourteen miles we reached
the mouth of a river on the north  which from the unusual number of
porcupines near it  we called porcupine river  this is a bold and
beautiful stream one hundred and twelve yards wide  though the water is
only forty yards at its entrance  captain clarke who ascended it several
miles and passed it above where it enters the highlands  found it
continued nearly of the same width and about knee deep  and as far as he
could distinguish for twenty miles from the hills  its course was from a
little to the east of north  there was much timber on the low grounds 
he found some limestone also on the surface of the earth in the course
of his walk  and saw a range of low mountains at a distance to the west
of north  whose direction was northwest  the adjoining country being
every where level  fertile  open  and exceedingly beautiful  the water
of this river is transparent  and is the only one that is so of all
those that fall into the missouri  before entering a large sandbar
through which it discharges itself  its low grounds are formed of a
stiff blue and black clay  and its banks which are from eight to ten
feet high and seldom if ever overflow are composed of the same
materials  from the quantity of water which this river contains  its
direction  and the nature of the country through which it passes  it is
not improbable that its sources may be near the main body of the
saskaskawan  and as in high water it can be no doubt navigated to a
considerable distance  it may be rendered the means of intercourse with
the athabasky country  from which the northwest company derive so many
of their valuable furs 

a quarter of a mile beyond this river a creek falls in on the south  to
which on account of its distance from the mouth of the missouri  we gave
it the name of two thousand mile creek  it is a bold stream with a bed
thirty yards wide  three miles and a half above porcupine river  we
reached some high timber on the north  and encamped just above an old
channel of the river  which is now dry  we saw vast quantities of
buffaloe  elk  deer  principally of the long tailed kind  antelopes 
beaver  geese  ducks  brant  and some swan  the porcupines too are
numerous  and so careless and clumsy that we can approach very near
without disturbing them as they are feeding on the young willows 
towards evening we also found for the first time  the nest of a goose
among some driftwood  all that we have hitherto seen being on the top of
a broken tree on the forks  and invariably from fifteen to twenty feet
or more in height 

saturday 4  we were detained till nine in order to repair the rudder of
one of the boats  and when we set out the wind was ahead  at six and a
half miles we passed a small creek in a deep bend on the south with a
sand island opposite to it  and then passing along an extensive plain
which gradually rises from the north side of the river  encamped at the
distance of eighteen miles in a point of woodland on the north  the
river is this day wider than usual  and crowded with sandbars on all
sides  the country is level  fertile  and beautiful  the low grounds
extensive and contain a much greater portion of timber than is common 
indeed all the forepart of the day the river was bordered with timber on
both sides  a circumstance very rare on the missouri  and the first that
has occurred since we left the mandans  there are as usual vast
quantities of game  and extremely gentle  the male buffaloe particularly
will scarcely give way to us  and as we approach will merely look at us
for a moment  as something new  and then quietly resume their feeding 
in the course of the day we passed some old indian hunting camps  one of
which consisted of two large lodges fortified with a circular fence 
twenty or thirty feet in diameter  and made of timber laid horizontally 
the beams overlaying each other to the height of five feet  and covered
with the trunks and limbs of trees that have drifted down the river  the
lodges themselves are formed by three or more strong sticks about the
size of a man s leg or arm  and twelve feet long  which are attached at
the top by a whith of small willows  and spreading out so as to form at
the base a circle of ten or fourteen feet in diameter  against these are
placed pieces of driftwood and fallen timber  usually in three ranges
one on the other  and the interstices are covered with leaves  bark  and
straw  so as to form a conical figure about ten feet high  with a small
aperture in one side for the door  it is  however  at best a very
imperfect shelter against the inclemencies of the seasons 

sunday 5  we had a fine morning  and the wind being from the east we
used our sails  at the distance of five miles we came to a small island 
and twelve miles farther encamped on the north  at the distance of
seventeen miles  the country like that of yesterday is beautiful in the
extreme  among the vast quantities of game around us  we distinguish a
small species of goose differing considerably from the common canadian
goose  its neck  head  and beak  being much thicker  larger  and shorter
in proportion to its size  which is nearly a third smaller  the noise
too resembling more that of the brant or of a young goose that has not
yet fully acquired its note  in other respects its colour  habits  and
the number of feathers in the tail  the two species correspond  this
species also associates in flocks with the large geese  but we have not
seen it pair off with them  the white brant is about the size of the
common brown brant  or two thirds of the common goose  than which it is
also six inches shorter from the extremity of the wings  though the
beak  head  and neck are larger and stronger  the body and wings are of
a beautiful pure white  except the black feathers of the first and
second joints of the wings  the beak and legs are of a reddish or
flesh coloured white  the eye of a moderate size  the pupil of a deep
sea green incircled with a ring of yellowish brown  the tail consists of
sixteen feathers equally long  the flesh is dark and as well as its note
differs but little from those of the common brant  whom in form and
habits it resembles  and with whom it sometimes unites in a common
flock  the white brant also associate by themselves in large flocks  but
as they do not seem to be mated or paired off  it is doubtful whether
they reside here during the summer for the purpose of rearing their
young 

the wolves are also very abundant  and are of two species  first  the
small wolf or burrowing dog of the prairies  which are found in almost
all the open plains  it is of an intermediate size between the fox and
dog  very delicately formed  fleet and active  the ears are large 
erect  and pointed  the head long and pointed  like that of the fox  the
tail long and bushy  the hair and fur of a pale reddish brown colour 
though much coarser than that of the fox  the eye of a deep sea green
colour  small and piercing  the talons rather longer than those of the
wolf of the atlantic states  which animal as far as we can perceive is
not to be found on this side of the river platte  these wolves usually
associate in bands of ten or twelve  and are rarely if ever seen alone 
not being able singly to attack a deer or antelope  they live and rear
their young in burrows  which they fix near some pass or spot much
frequented by game  and sally out in a body against any animal which
they think they can overpower  but on the slightest alarm retreat to
their burrows making a noise exactly like that of a small dog 

the second species is lower  shorter in the legs and thicker than the
atlantic wolf  their colour  which is not affected by the seasons  is of
every variety of shade  from a gray or blackish brown to a cream
coloured white  they do not burrow  nor do they bark  but howl  and they
frequent the woods and plains  and skulk along the skirts of the
buffaloe herds  in order to attack the weary or wounded 

captain clarke and one of the hunters met this evening the largest brown
bear we have seen  as they fired he did not attempt to attack  but fled
with a most tremendous roar  and such was its extraordinary tenacity of
life  that although he had five balls passed through his lungs and five
other wounds  he swam more than half across the river to a sandbar  and
survived twenty minutes  he weighed between five and six hundred pounds
at least  and measured eight feet seven inches and a half from the nose
to the extremity of the hind feet  five feet ten inches and half round
the breast  three feet eleven inches round the neck  one foot eleven
inches round the middle of the foreleg  and his talons  five on each
foot  were four inches and three eighths in length  it differs from the
common black bear in having its talons much longer and more blunt  its
tail shorter  its hair of a reddish or bay brown  longer  finer  and
more abundant  his liver  lungs  and heart  much larger even in
proportion to his size  the heart particularly being equal to that of a
large ox  his maw ten times larger  his testicles pendant from the belly
and in separate pouches four inches apart  besides fish and flesh he
feeds on roots  and every kind of wild fruit 

the antelope are now lean and with young  so that they may readily be
caught at this season  as they cross the river from s w  to n e 

monday 6  the morning being fair and the wind favourable  we set sail 
and proceeded on very well the greater part of the day  the country
continues level  rich  and beautiful  the low grounds wide and
comparatively with the other parts of the missouri  well supplied with
wood  the appearances of coal  pumicestone  and burnt earth have ceased 
though the salts of tartar or vegetable salts continue on the banks and
sandbars  and sometimes in the little ravines at the base of the low
hills  we passed three streams on the south  the first at the distance
of one mile and a half from our camp was about twenty five yards wide 
but although it contained some water in standing pools it discharges
none  this we called littledry creek  about eight miles beyond which is
bigdry creek  fifty yards wide  without any water  the third is six
miles further  and has the bed of a large river two hundred yards wide 
yet without a drop of water  like the other two this stream  which we
called bigdry river  continues its width undiminished as far as we can
discern  the banks are low  this channel formed of a fine brown sand 
intermixed with a small proportion of little pebbles of various colours 
and the country around flat and without trees  they had recently
discharged their waters  and from their appearance and the nature of the
country through which they pass  we concluded that they rose in the
black mountains  or in the level low plains which are probably between
this place and the mountains  that the country being nearly of the same
kind and of the same latitude  the rains of spring melting the snows
about the same time  conspire with them to throw at once vast quantities
of water down these channels  which are then left dry during the summer 
autumn  and winter  when there is very little rain  we had to day a
slight sprinkling  but it lasted a very short time  the game is in such
plenty that it has become a mere amusement to supply the party with
provisions  we made twenty five miles to a clump of trees on the north
where we passed the night 

tuesday 7  the morning was pleasant and we proceeded at an early hour 
there is much driftwood floating  and what is contrary to our
expectation  although the river is rising  the water is somewhat clearer
than usual  at eleven o clock the wind became so high that one of the
boats was nearly sunk  and we were obliged to stop till one  when we
proceeded on  and encamped on the south  above a large sandbar
projecting from the north  having made fifteen miles  on the north side
of the river are the most beautiful plains we have yet seen  they rise
gradually from the low grounds on the water to the height of fifty or
sixty feet  and then extend in an unbroken level as far as the eye can
reach  the hills on the south are more broken and higher  though at some
distance back the country becomes level and fertile  there are no more
appearances of burnt earth  coal  or pumicestone  though that of salt
still continues  and the vegetation seems to have advanced but little
since the twenty eighth of last month  the game is as abundant as usual 
the bald eagles  of whom we see great numbers  probably feed on the
carcases of dead animals  for on the whole missouri we have seen neither
the blue crested fisher  nor the fishing hawks  to supply them with
their favourite food  and the water of the river is so turbid that no
bird which feeds exclusively on fish can procure a subsistence 

wednesday 8  a light breeze from the east carried us sixteen miles  till
we halted for dinner at the entrance of a river on the north  captain
clarke who had walked on the south  on ascending a high point opposite
to its entrance discovered a level and beautiful country which it
watered  that its course for twelve or fifteen miles was n w  when it
divided into two nearly equal branches  one pursuing a direction nearly
north  the other to the w  of n w  its width at the entrance is one
hundred and fifty yards  and on going three miles up  captain lewis
found it to be of the same breadth  and sometimes more  it is deep 
gentle  and has a large quantity of water  its bed is principally of
mud  the banks abrupt  about twelve feet in height  and formed of a
dark  rich loam and blue clay  the low grounds near it are wide and
fertile  and possess a considerable proportion of cottonwood and willow 
it seems to be navigable for boats and canoes  and this circumstance
joined to its course and the quantity of water  which indicates that it
passes through a large extent of country  we are led to presume that it
may approach the saskashawan and afford a communication with that river 
the water has a peculiar whiteness  such as might be produced by a
tablespoon full of milk in a dish of tea  and this circumstance induced
us to call it milk river  in the evening we had made twenty seven miles 
and encamped on the south  the country on that side consists in general
of high broken hills  with much gray  black and brown granite scattered
over the surface of the ground  at a little distance from the river
there is no timber on either side  the wood being confined as below to
the margin of the river  so that unless the contrary is particularly
mentioned  it is always understood that the upland is perfectly naked 
and that we consider the low grounds well timbered if even a fifth be
covered with wood  the wild liquorice is found in great abundance on
these hills  as is also the white apple  as usual we are surrounded by
buffaloe  elk  common and blacktailed deer  beaver  antelopes and
wolves  we observed a place where an indian had recently taken the hair
off an antelope s skin  and some of the party thought they distinguished
imperfectly some smoke and indian lodges up milk river  marks which we
are by no means desirous of realizing  as the indians are probably
assiniboins  and might be very troublesome 

thursday  9th  we again had a favourable wind and sailed along very
well  between four and five miles we passed a large island in a deep
bend to the north  and a large sandbar at the upper point  at fifteen
and a quarter miles we reached the bed of a most extraordinary river
which presents itself on the south  though as wide as the missouri
itself  that is about half a mile  it does not discharge a drop of water
and contains nothing but a few standing pools  on ascending it three
miles we found an eminence from which we saw the direction of the
channel  first south for ten or twelve miles  then turning to the east
of southeast as far as we could see  it passes through a wide valley
without timber  and the surrounding country consists of waving low hills
interspersed with some handsome level plains  the banks are abrupt and
consist of a black or yellow clay  or of a rich sandy loam  but though
they do not rise more than six or eight feet above the bed  they exhibit
no appearance of being overflowed  the bed is entirely composed of a
light brown sand  the particles of which like those of the missouri are
extremely fine  like the dry rivers we passed before  this seemed to
have discharged its waters recently  but the watermark indicated that
its greatest depth had not been more than two feet  this stream  if it
deserve the name  we called bigdry river  about a mile below is a large
creek on the same side  which is also perfectly dry  the mineral salts
and quartz are in large quantities near this neighbourhood  the sand of
the missouri from its mouth to this place has been mixed with a
substance which we had presumed to be a granulated chalk  but which is
most probably this quartz  the game is now in great quantities 
particularly the elk and buffaloe  which last is so gentle that the men
are obliged to drive them out of the way with sticks and stones  the
ravages of the beaver are very apparent  in one place the timber was
entirely prostrated for a space of three acres in front on the river and
one in depth  and great part of it removed  although the trees were in
large quantities  and some of them as thick as the body of a man  at the
distance of twenty four miles we encamped  after making twenty five and
a half miles  at the entrance of a small creek in a bend on the north 
to which we gave the name of werner s creek after one of our men 

for several days past the river has been as wide as it generally is near
its mouth  but as it is much shallower  crowded with sandbars  and the
colour of the water has become much clearer  we do not yet despair of
reaching the rock mountains  for which we are very anxious 

friday  10th  we had not proceeded more than four and a quarter miles
when the violence of the wind forced us to halt for the day under some
timber in a bend on the south side  the wind continued high  the clouds
thick and black  and we had a slight sprinkling of rain several times in
the course of the day  shortly after our landing a dog came to us  and
as this induced us to believe that we are near the hunting grounds of
the assiniboins  who are a vicious ill disposed people  it was
necessary to be on our guard  we therefore inspected our arms which we
found in good order  and sent several hunters to scour the country  but
they returned in the evening having seen no tents  nor any recent tracks
of indians  biles and imposthumes are very common among the party  and
sore eyes continue in a greater or less degree with all of us  for the
imposthumes we use emollient poultices  and apply to the eyes a solution
of two grains of white vitriol and one of sugar of lead with one ounce
of water 

saturday  11th  the wind blew very hard in the night  but having abated
this morning we went on very well  till in the afternoon the wind arose
and retarded our progress  the current too was strong  the river very
crooked  and the banks as usual constantly precipitating themselves in
large masses into the water  the highlands are broken and approach
nearer the river than they do below  the soil however of both hills and
low grounds appear as fertile as that further down the river  it
consists of a black looking loam with a small portion of sand  which
cover the hills and bluffs to the depth of twenty or thirty feet  and
when thrown in the water dissolves as readily as loaf sugar  and
effervesces like marle  there are also great appearances of quartz and
mineral salts  the first is most commonly seen in the faces of the
bluffs  the second is found on the hills as well as the low grounds  and
in the gullies which come down from the hills  it lies in a crust of two
or three inches in depth  and may be swept up with a feather in large
quantities  there is no longer any appearance of coal burnt earth or
pumicestone  we saw and visited some high hills on the north side about
three miles from the river  whose tops were covered with the pitch pine 
this in the first pine we have seen on the missouri  and it is like that
of virginia  except that the leaves are somewhat longer  among this pine
is also a dwarf cedar  sometimes between three or four feet high  but
generally spreading itself like a vine along the surface of the earth 
which it covers very closely  putting out roots from the under side  the
fruit and smell resemble those of the common red cedar  but the leaf is
finer and more delicate  the tops of the hills where these plants grow
have a soil quite different from that just described  the basis of it is
usually yellow or white clay  and the general appearance light coloured 
sandy  and barren  some scattering tufts of sedge being almost its only
herbage  about five in the afternoon one of our men who had been
afflicted with biles  and suffered to walk on shore  came running to the
boats with loud cries and every symptom of terror and distress  for some
time after we had taken him on board he was so much out of breath as to
be unable to describe the cause of his anxiety  but he at length told us
that about a mile and a half below he had shot a brown bear which
immediately turned and was in close pursuit of him  but the bear being
badly wounded could not overtake him  captain lewis with seven men
immediately went in search of him  and having found his track followed
him by the blood for a mile  and found him concealed in some thick
brushwood  and shot him with two balls through the skull  though
somewhat smaller than that killed a few days ago  he was a monstrous
animal and a most terrible enemy  our man had shot him through the
centre of the lungs  yet he had pursued him furiously for half a mile 
then returned more than twice that distance  and with his talons had
prepared himself a bed in the earth two feet deep and five feet long 
and was perfectly alive when they found him  which was at least two
hours after he received the wound  the wonderful power of life which
these animals possess render them dreadful  their very track in the mud
or sand  which we have sometimes found eleven inches long and seven and
a quarter wide  exclusive of the talons  is alarming  and we had rather
encounter two indians than meet a single brown bear  there is no chance
of killing them by a single shot unless the ball goes through the
brains  and this is very difficult on account of two large muscles
which cover the side of the forehead  and the sharp projection of the
centre of the frontal bone  which is also thick  our encampment was on
the south at the distance of sixteen miles from that of last night  the
fleece and skin of the bear were a heavy burden for two men  and the oil
amounted to eight gallons 

sunday  12th  the weather being clear and calm  we set out early  within
a mile we came to a small creek  about twenty yards wide  emptying
itself on the south  at eleven and three quarter miles we reached a
point of woodland on the south  opposite to which is a creek of the same
width as the last  but with little water  which we called pine creek  at
eighteen and three quarter miles we came to on the south opposite to the
lower point of a willow island  situated in a deep bend of the river to
the southeast  here we remained during the day  the wind having risen at
twelve so high that we could not proceed  it continued to blow violently
all night  with occasional sprinklings of rain from sunset till
midnight  on both sides of the river the country is rough and broken 
the low grounds becoming narrower  the tops of the hills on the north
exhibits some scattered pine and cedar  on the south the pine has not
yet commenced  though there is some cedar on the sides of the hills and
in the little ravines  the chokecherry  the wild hysop  sage 
fleshy leafed thorn  and particularly the aromatic herb on which the
antelope and hare feed  are to be found on the plains and hills  the
soil of the hills has now altered its texture considerably  their bases 
like that of the river plains  is as usual a rich  black loam  while
from the middle to the summits they are composed of a light
brown coloured earth  poor and sterile  and intermixed with a coarse
white sand 

monday  13th  the wind was so strong that we could not proceed till
about one o clock  when we had to encounter a current rather stronger
than usual  in the course of a mile and a half we passed two small
creeks on the south  one of eighteen the other of thirty yards width 
but neither of them containing any water  and encamped on the south at a
point of woodland  having made only seven miles  the country is much the
same as yesterday  with little timber in the low grounds  and a small
quantity of pine and cedar on the northern hills  the river however
continues to grow clearer  and this as well as the increased rapidity
induces us to hope for some change of country  the game is as usual so
abundant that we can get without difficulty all that is necessary 

tuesday  14th  there was some fog on the river this morning  which is a
very rare occurrence  at the distance of a mile and a half we reached an
island in a bend on the north  which continued for about half a mile 
when at the head of it a large creek comes in on the north  to which we
gave the name of gibson s creek  at seven and a half miles is a point of
rocks on the south  above a creek on the same side  which we called
sticklodge creek  five miles further is a large creek on the south 
which like the two others has no running water  and at sixteen and a
half miles a timbered point on the north  where we encamped for the
night  the country is like that of yesterday  except that the low
grounds are wider  there are also many high black bluffs along the
banks  the game too is in great abundance  towards evening the men in
the hindmost canoes discovered a large brown bear lying in the open
grounds  about three hundred paces from the river  six of them  all good
hunters  immediately went to attack him  and concealing themselves by a
small eminence came unperceived within forty paces of him  four of the
hunters now fired  and each lodged a ball in his body  two of them
directly through the lungs  the furious animal sprung up and ran
openmouthed upon them  as he came near  the two hunters who had reserved
their fire gave him two wounds  one of which breaking his shoulder
retarded his motion for a moment  but before they could reload he was so
near that they were obliged to run to the river  and before they
reached it he had almost overtaken them  two jumped into the canoe  the
other four separated  and concealing themselves in the willows fired as
fast as each could reload  they struck him several times  but instead of
weakening the monster each shot seemed only to direct him towards the
hunter  till at last he pursued two of them so closely  that they threw
aside their guns and pouches  and jumped down a perpendicular bank of
twenty feet into the river  the bear sprang after them  and was within a
few feet of the hindmost  when one of the hunters on shore shot him in
the head and finally killed him  they dragged him to the shore  and
found that eight balls had passed through him in different directions 
the bear was old and the meat tough  so that they took the skin only 
and rejoined us at camp  where we had been as much terrified by an
accident of a different kind  this was the narrow escape of one of our
canoes containing all our papers  instruments  medicine  and almost
every article indispensible for the success of our enterprise  the canoe
being under sail  a sudden squall of wind struck her obliquely  and
turned her considerably  the man at the helm  who was unluckily the
worst steersman of the party  became alarmed  and instead of putting her
before the wind luffed her up into it  the wind was so high that it
forced the brace of the squaresail out of the hand of the man who was
attending it  and instantly upset the canoe  which would have turned
bottom upwards but for the resistance made by the awning  such was the
confusion on board  and the waves ran so high  that it was half a minute
before she righted  and then nearly full of water  but by baling out she
was kept from sinking until they rowed ashore  besides the loss of the
lives of three men who not being able to swim would probably have
perished  we should have been deprived of nearly every thing necessary
for our purpose  at a distance of between two and three thousand miles
from any place where we could supply the deficiency 

wednesday 15  as soon as a slight shower of rain had passed  we spread
out the articles to dry  but the weather was so damp and cloudy that
they derived little benefit from exposure  our hunters procured us deer 
buffaloe  and beaver 

thursday 16  the morning was fair and we were enabled to dry and repack
our stores  the loss we sustained is chiefly in the medicines  many
articles of which are completely spoiled  and others considerably
injured  at four o clock we embarked  and after making seven miles
encamped on the north near some wood  the country on both sides is
broken  the low grounds narrower and with less timber  though there are
some scattered pine and cedar on the steep declivities of the hills 
which are now higher than usual  a white bear tore the coat of one of
the men which he had left on shore  and two of the party wounded a large
panther who was feasting on a deer  we caught some lean antelopes as
they were swimming the river  and killed two buffaloe 

friday 17  we set out early and proceeded on very well  the banks being
firm and the shore bold we were enabled to use the towline  which 
whenever the banks will permit it  is the safest and most expeditious
mode of ascending the river  except under a sail with a steady breeze 
at the distance of ten and a half miles we came to the mouth of a small
creek on the south  below which the hills approach the river  and
continue near it during the day  three miles further is a large creek on
the north  and again six and three quarter miles beyond it  another
large creek to the south  which contain a small quantity of running
water of a brackish taste  the last we called rattlesnake creek from our
seeing that animal near it  although no timber can be observed on it
from the missouri  it throws out large quantities of driftwood  among
which were some pieces of coal brought down by the stream  we continued
on one mile and a quarter  and encamped on the south  after making
twenty and a half miles  the country in general is rugged  the hills
high  with their summits and sides partially covered with pine and
cedar  and their bases on both sides washed by the river  like those
already mentioned the lower part of these hills is a dark rich loam 
while the upper region for one hundred and fifty feet consists of a
whitish brown sand  so hard as in many places to resemble stone  though
in fact very little stone or rock of any kind is to be seen on the
hills  the bed of the missouri is much narrower than usual  being not
more than between two and three hundred yards in width  with an
uncommonly large proportion of gravel  but the sandbars  and low points
covered with willows have almost entirely disappeared  the timber on the
river consists of scarcely any thing more than a few scattered
cottonwood trees  the saline incrustations along the banks and the foot
of the hills are more abundant than usual  the game is in great
quantities  but the buffaloe are not so numerous as they were some days
ago  two rattlesnakes were seen to day  and one of them killed  it
resembles those of the middle atlantic states  being about two feet six
inches long  of a yellowish brown on the back and sides  variegated with
a row of oval dark brown spots lying transversely on the back from the
neck to the tail  and two other rows of circular spots of the same
colour on the sides along the edge of the scuta  there are one hundred
and seventy six scuta on the belly  and seventeen on the tail  captain
clarke saw in his excursions a fortified indian camp which appeared to
have been recently occupied  and was  we presumed  made by a party of
minnetarees who went to war last march 

late at night we were roused by the sergeant of the guard in consequence
of a fire which had communicated to a tree overhanging our camp  the
wind was so high  that we had not removed the camp more than a few
minutes when a large part of the tree fell precisely on the spot it had
occupied  and would have crushed us if we had not been alarmed in time 

saturday 18  the wind continued high from the west  but by means of the
towline we were able to make nineteen miles  the sandbars being now few
in number  the river narrow and the current gentle  the willow has in a
great measure disappeared  and even the cottonwood  almost the only
timber remaining  is growing scarce  at twelve and three quarter miles
we came to a creek on the north  which was perfectly dry  we encamped on
the south opposite the lower point of an island 

sunday 19  the last night was disagreeably cold  and in the morning
there was a very heavy fog which obscured the river so much as to
prevent our seeing the way  this is the first fog of any degree of
thickness which we have experienced  there was also last evening a fall
of dew  the second which we have seen since entering this extensive open
country  about eight o clock the fog dispersed  and we proceeded with
the aid of the towline  the island near which we were encamped  was
three quarters of a mile in length  the country resembles that of
yesterday  high hills closely bordering the river  in the afternoon the
river became crooked  and contained more sawyers or floating timber than
we have seen in the same space since leaving the platte  our game
consisted of deer  beaver  and elk  we also killed a brown bear  who 
although shot through the heart  ran at his usual pace nearly a quarter
of a mile before he fell  at twenty one miles is a willow island half a
mile in length  on the north side  a quarter of a mile beyond which is a
shoal of rapid water under a bluff  the water continued very strong for
some distance beyond it  at half a mile we came to a sandbar on the
north  from which to our place of encampment was another half mile 
making in all twenty two and a quarter miles  the saline substances
which we have mentioned continue to appear  and the men are much
afflicted with sore eyes and imposthumes 

monday 20  as usual we set out early  and the banks being convenient for
that purpose  we used the towline  the river is narrow and crooked  the
water rapid  and the country much like that of yesterday  at the
distance of two and a quarter miles we passed a large creek with but
little water  to which we gave the name of blowingfly creek  from the
quantity of those insects found in its neighbourhood  they are extremely
troublesome  infesting our meat whilst cooking and at our meals  after
making seven miles we reached by eleven o clock the mouth of a large
river on the south  and encamped for the day at the upper point of its
junction with the missouri  this stream which we suppose to be that
called by the minnetarees the muscleshell river  empties into the
missouri two thousand two hundred and seventy miles above the mouth of
the latter river  and in latitude 47 degrees 0  24  6 north  it is one
hundred and ten yards wide  and contains more water than streams of that
size usually do in this country  its current is by no means rapid  and
there is every appearance of its being susceptible of navigation by
canoes for a considerable distance  its bed is chiefly formed of coarse
sand and gravel  with an occasional mixture of black mud  the banks
abrupt and nearly twelve feet high  so that they are secure from being
overflowed  the water is of a greenish yellow cast and much more
transparent than that of the missouri  which itself  though clearer than
below  still retains its whitish hue and a portion of its sediment 
opposite to the point of junction the current of the missouri is gentle 
and two hundred and twenty two yards in width  the bed principally of
mud  the little sand remaining being wholly confined to the points  and
still too deep to use the setting pole  if this be  as we suppose  the
muscleshell  our indian information is  that it rises in the first chain
of the rocky mountains not far from the sources of the yellowstone 
whence in its course to this place it waters a high broken country  well
timbered particularly on its borders  and interspersed with handsome
fertile plains and meadows  we have reason  however  to believe  from
their giving a similar account of the timber where we now are  that the
timber of which they speak is similar to that which we have seen for a
few days past  which consists of nothing more than a few straggling
small pine and dwarf cedar  on the summits of the hills  nine tenths of
the ground being totally destitute of wood  and covered with a short
grass  aromatic herbs  and an immense quantity of prickly pears  though
the party who explored it for eight miles represented low grounds on the
river as well supplied with cottonwood of a tolerable size  and of an
excellent soil  they also reported that the country is broken and
irregular like that near our camp  that about five miles up a handsome
river about fifty yards wide  which we named after chaboneau s wife 
sahcajahweah  or birdwoman s river  discharges itself into the
muscleshell on the north or upper side  another party found at the foot
of the southern hills  about four miles from the missouri  a fine bold
spring  which in this country is so rare that since we left the mandans
we have found only one of a similar kind  and that was under the bluffs
on the south side of the missouri  at some distance from it  and about
five miles below the yellowstone  with this exception all the small
fountains of which we have met a number are impregnated with the salts
which are so abundant here  and with which the missouri is itself most
probably tainted  though to us who have been so much accustomed to it 
the taste is not perceptible  among the game to day we observed two
large owls  with remarkably long feathers resembling ears on the sides
of the head  which we presume are the hooting owls  though they are
larger and their colours are brighter than those common in the united
states 

tuesday 21  the morning being very fine we were able to employ the rope
and made twenty miles to our camp on the north  the shores of the river
are abrupt  bold and composed of a black and yellow clay  the bars being
formed of black mud  and a small proportion of fine sand  the current
strong  in its course the missouri makes a sudden and extensive bend
towards the south  to receive the waters of the muscleshell  the neck of
land thus formed  though itself high is lower than the surrounding
country  and makes a waving valley extending for a great distance to the
northward  with a fertile soil which  though without wood  produces a
fine turf of low grass  some herbs and vast quantities of prickly pear 
the country on the south is high  broken  and crowned with some pine and
dwarf cedar  the leaf of this pine is longer than that of the common
pitch or red pine of virginia  the cone is longer and narrower  the
imbrications wider and thicker  and the whole frequently covered with
rosin  during the whole day the bends of the river are short and sudden 
and the points covered with some cottonwood  large or broad leaved
willow  and a small quantity of redwood  the undergrowth consisting of
wild roses  and the bushes of the small honeysuckle 

the mineral appearances on the river are as usual  we do not find the
grouse or prairie hen so abundant as below  and think it probable that
they retire from the river to the plains during this season 

the wind had been moderate during the fore part of the day  but
continued to rise towards evening  and about dark veered to northeast 
and blew a storm all night  we had encamped on a bar on the north 
opposite the lower point of an island  which from this circumstance we
called windy island  but we were so annoyed by clouds of dust and sand
that we could neither eat nor sleep  and were forced to remove our camp
at eight o clock to the foot of an adjoining hill  which shielded us in
some degree from the wind  we procured elk  deer  and buffaloe 

wednesday 22  the wind blew so violently that it was deemed prudent to
wait till it had abated  so that we did not leave the camp till ten
o clock  when we proceeded principally by the towline  we passed windy
island which is about three quarters of a mile in length  and five and a
half miles above it a large island in a bend to the north  three miles
beyond this we came to the entrance of a creek twenty yards wide  though
with little water  which we called grouse creek  from observing near its
mouth a quantity of the prairie hen with pointed tails  the first we
have seen in such numbers for several days  the low grounds are somewhat
wider than usual and apparently fertile  though the short and scanty
grass on the hills does not indicate much richness of soil  the country
around is not so broken as that of yesterday  but is still waving  the
southern hills possessing more pine than usual  and some appearing on
the northern hills  which are accompanied by the usual salt and mineral
appearances 

the river continues about two hundred and fifty yards wide  with fewer
sandbars  and the current more gentle and regular  game is no longer in
such abundance  since leaving the muscleshell  we have caught very few
fish on this side of the mandans  and these were the white catfish of
two to five pounds  we killed a deer and a bear  we have not seen in
this quarter the black bear  common in the united states and on the
lower parts of the missouri  nor have we discerned any of their tracks 
which may easily be distinguished by the shortness of its talons from
the brown  grizzly  or white bear  all of which seem to be of the same
family  which assumes those colours at different seasons of the year  we
halted earlier than usual  and encamped on the north  in a point of
woods  at the distance of sixteen and a half miles 




                                chapter ix 

     the party continue their route  description of judith river  indian
     mode of taking the buffaloe  slaughter river described  phenomena
     of nature  of walls on the banks of the missouri  the party encamp
     on the banks of the river to ascertain which of the streams
     constitute the missouri  captain lewis leaves the party to explore
     the northern fork  and captain clarke explores the southern  the
     surrounding country described in the route of captain lewis  narrow
     escape of one of his party 


thursday 23  last night the frost was severe  and this morning the ice
appeared along the edges of the river  and the water froze on our oars 
at the distance of a mile we passed the entrance of a creek on the
north  which we named teapot creek  it is fifteen yards wide  and
although it has running water at a small distance from its mouth  yet it
discharges none into the missouri  resembling  we believe  most of the
creeks in this hilly country  the waters of which are absorbed by the
thirsty soil near the river  they indeed afford but little water in any
part  and even that is so strongly tainted with salts that it is unfit
for use  though all the wild animals are very fond of it  on experiment
it was found to be moderately purgative  but painful to the intestines
in its operation  this creek seems to come from a range of low hills 
which run from east to west for seventy miles  and have their eastern
extremity thirty miles to the north of teapot creek  just above its
entrance is a large assemblage of the burrowing squirrels on the north
side of the river  at nine miles we reached the upper point of an island
in a bend on the south  and opposite the centre of the island  a small
dry creek on the north  half a mile further a small creek falls in on
the same side  and six and a half miles beyond this another on the
south  at four and a half we passed a small island in a deep bend to
the north  and on the same side in a deep northeastern bend of the river
another small island  none of these creeks however possessed any water 
and at the entrances of the islands  the two first are covered with tall
cottonwood timber  and the last with willows only  the river has become
more rapid  the country much the same as yesterday  except that there is
rather more rocks on the face of the hills  and some small spruce pine
appears among the pitch  the wild roses are very abundant and now in
bloom  they differ from those of the united states only in having the
leaves and the bush itself of a somewhat smaller size  we find the
musquitoes troublesome  notwithstanding the coolness of the morning  the
buffaloe is scarce to day  but the elk  deer  and antelope  are very
numerous  the geese begin to lose the feathers of the wings  and are
unable to fly  we saw five bears  one of which we wounded  but in
swimming from us across the river  he become entangled in some driftwood
and sank  we formed our camp on the north opposite to a hill and a point
of wood in a bend to the south  having made twenty seven miles 

friday 24  the water in the kettles froze one eighth of an inch during
the night  the ice appears along the margin of the river  and the
cottonwood trees which have lost nearly all their leaves by the frost 
are putting forth other buds  we proceeded with the line principally
till about nine o clock  when a fine breeze sprung up from the s e  and
enabled us to sail very well  notwithstanding the rapidity of the
current  at one mile and a half is a large creek thirty yards wide  and
containing some water which it empties on the north side  over a
gravelly bed  intermixed with some stone  a man who was sent up to
explore the country returned in the evening  after having gone ten miles
directly towards the ridge of mountains to the north  which is the
source of this as well as of teapot creek  the air of these highlands is
so pure  that objects appear much nearer than they really are  so that
although our man went ten miles without thinking himself by any means
half way to the mountains  they do not from the river appear more than
fifteen miles distant  this stream we called northmountain creek  two
and a half miles higher is a creek on the south which is fifteen yards
wide  but without any water  and to which we gave the name of littledog
creek  from a village of burrowing squirrels opposite to its entrance 
that being the name given by the french watermen to those animals  three
miles from this a small creek enters on the north  five beyond which is
an island a quarter of a mile in length  and two miles further a small
river  this falls in on the south  is forty yards wide  and discharges a
handsome stream of water  its bed rocky with gravel and sand  and the
banks high  we called it southmountain creek  as from its direction it
seemed to rise in a range of mountains about fifty or sixty miles to the
s w  of its entrance  the low grounds are narrow and without timber  the
country high and broken  a large portion of black rock  and brown sandy
rock appears in the face of the hills  the tops of which are covered
with scattered pine  spruce and dwarf cedar  the soil is generally poor 
sandy near the tops of the hills  and nowhere producing much grass  the
low grounds being covered with little else than the hysop  or southern
wood  and the pulpy leafed thorn  game is more scarce  particularly
beaver  of which we have seen but few for several days  and the
abundance or scarcity of which seems to depend on the greater or less
quantity of timber  at twenty four and a half miles we reached a point
of woodland on the south  where we observed that the trees had no
leaves  and encamped for the night  the high country through which we
have passed for some days  and where we now are  we suppose to be a
continuation of what the french traders called the cote noire or black
hills  the country thus denominated consists of high broken irregular
hills and short chains of mountains  sometimes one hundred and twenty
miles in width  sometimes narrower  but always much higher than the
country on either side  they commence about the head of the kanzas 
where they diverge  the first ridge going westward  along the northern
shore of the arkansaw  the second approaches the rock mountains
obliquely in a course a little to the w  of n w  and after passing the
platte above its forks  and intersecting the yellowstone near the
bigbend  crosses the missouri at this place  and probably swell the
country as far as the saskashawan  though as they are represented much
smaller here than to the south  they may not reach that river 

saturday  25th  two canoes which were left behind yesterday to bring on
the game  did not join us till eight o clock this morning  when we set
out with the towline  the use of which the banks permitted  the wind
was  however  ahead  the current strong  particularly round the points
against which it happened to set  and the gullies from the hills having
brought down quantities of stone  those projected into the river 
forming barriers for forty or fifty feet round  which it was very
difficult to pass  at the distance of two and three quarter miles we
passed a small island in a deep bend on the south  and on the same side
a creek twenty yards wide  but with no running water  about a mile
further is an island between two and three miles in length  separated
from the northern shore by a narrow channel  in which is a sand island
at the distance of half a mile from its lower extremity  to this large
island we gave the name of teapot island  two miles above which is an
island a mile long  and situated on the south  at three and a half miles
is another small island  and one mile beyond it a second three quarters
of a mile in length  on the north side  in the middle of the river two
miles above this is an island with no timber  and of the same extent as
this last  the country on each side is high  broken  and rocky  the rock
being either a soft brown sandstone  covered with a thin stratum of
limestone  or else a hard black rugged granite  both usually in
horizontal stratas  and the sandrock overlaying the other  salts and
quartz as well as some coal and pumicestone still appear  the bars of
the river are composed principally of gravel  the river low grounds are
narrow  and afford scarcely any timber  nor is there much pine on the
hills  the buffaloe have now become scarce  we saw a polecat this
evening  which was the first for several days  in the course of the day
we also saw several herds of the big horned animals among the steep
cliffs on the north  and killed several of them  at the distance of
eighteen miles we encamped on the south  and the next morning 

sunday  26th  proceeded on at an early hour by means of the towline 
using our oars merely in passing the river  to take advantage of the
best banks  there are now scarcely any low grounds on the river  the
hills being high and in many places pressing on both sides to the verge
of the water  the black rock has given place to a very soft sandstone 
which seems to be washed away fast by the river  and being thrown into
the river renders its navigation more difficult than it was yesterday 
above this sandstone  and towards the summits of the hills  a hard
freestone of a yellowish brown colour shows itself in several stratas of
unequal thickness  frequently overlaid or incrusted by a thin stratum of
limestone  which seems to be formed of concreted shells  at eight and a
quarter miles we came to the mouth of a creek on the north  thirty yards
wide  with some running water and a rocky bed  we called it windsor
creek  after one of the party  four and three quarter miles beyond this
we came to another creek in a bend to the north  which is twenty yards
wide  with a handsome little stream of water  there is however no timber
on either side of the river  except a few pines on the hills  here we
saw for the first time since we left the mandans several soft shelled
turtles  though this may be owing rather to the season of the year than
to any scarcity of the animal  it was here that after ascending the
highest summits of the hills on the north side of the river  that
captain lewis first caught a distant view of the rock mountains  the
object of all our hopes  and the reward of all our ambition  on both
sides of the river and at no great distance from it  the mountains
followed its course  above these  at the distance of fifty miles from
us  an irregular range of mountains spread themselves from west to
northwest from his position  to the north of these a few elevated
points  the most remarkable of which bore north 65 degrees west 
appeared above the horizon  and as the sun shone on the snows of their
summits he obtained a clear and satisfactory view of those mountains
which close on the missouri the passage to the pacific  four and a half
miles beyond this creek we came to the upper point of a small sand
island  at the distance of five miles between high bluffs  we passed a
very difficult rapid  reaching quite across the river  where the water
is deep  the channel narrow  and gravel obstructing it on each side  we
had great difficulty in ascending it  although we used both the rope and
the pole  and doubled the crews  this is the most considerable rapid on
the missouri  and in fact the only place where there is a sudden
descent  as we were labouring over them  a female elk with its fawn swam
down through the waves  which ran very high  and obtained for the place
the name of the elk rapids  just above them is a small low ground of
cottonwood trees  where  at twenty two and a quarter miles we fixed our
encampment  and were joined by captain lewis  who had been on the hills
during the afternoon 

the country has now become desert and barren  the appearances of coal 
burnt earth  pumicestone  salts  and quartz  continue as yesterday  but
there is no timber except the thinly scattered pine and spruce on the
summits of the hills  or along the sides  the only animals we have
observed are the elk  the bighorn  and the hare  common in this country 
in the plain where we lie are two indian cabins made of sticks  and
during the last few days we have passed several others in the points of
timber on the river 

monday  27  the wind was so high that we did not start till ten o clock 
and even then were obliged to use the line during the greater part of
the day  the river has become very rapid with a very perceptible
descent  its general width is about two hundred yards  the shoals too
are more frequent  and the rocky points at the mouth of the gullies more
troublesome to pass  great quantities of this stone lie in the river and
on its banks  and seem to have fallen down as the rain washed away the
clay and sand in which they were imbedded  the water is bordered by high
rugged bluffs  composed of irregular but horizontal stratas of yellow
and brown or black clay  brown and yellowish white sand  soft yellowish
white sandstone  hard dark brown freestone  and also large round kidney
formed irregular separate masses of a hard black ironstone  imbedded in
the clay and sand  some coal or carbonated wood also makes its
appearance in the cliffs  as do also its usual attendants the
pumicestone and burnt earth  the salts and quartz are less abundant  and
generally speaking the country is if possible more rugged and barren
than that we passed yesterday  the only growth of the hills being a few
pine  spruce  and dwarf cedar  interspersed with an occasional contrast
once in the course of some miles  of several acres of level ground 
which supply a scanty subsistence for a few little cottonwood trees 

soon after setting out we passed a small untimbered island on the south 
at about seven miles we reached a considerable bend which the river
makes towards the southeast  and in the evening  after making twelve and
a half miles  encamped on the south near two dead cottonwood trees  the
only timber for fuel which we could discover in the neighbourhood 

tuesday  28  the weather was dark and cloudy  the air smoky  and there
fell a few drops of rain  at ten o clock we had again a slight
sprinkling of rain  attended with distant thunder  which is the first we
have heard since leaving the mandans  we employed the line generally 
with the addition of the pole at the ripples and rocky points  which we
find more numerous and troublesome than those we passed yesterday  the
water is very rapid round these points  and we are sometimes obliged to
steer the canoes through the points of sharp rocks rising a few inches
above the surface of the water  and so near to each other that if our
ropes give way the force of the current drives the sides of the canoe
against them  and must inevitably upset them or dash them to pieces 
these cords are very slender  being almost all made of elkskin  and much
worn and rotted by exposure to the weather  several times they gave way 
but fortunately always in places where there was room for the canoe to
turn without striking the rock  yet with all our precautions it was with
infinite risk and labour that we passed these points  an indian pole for
building floated down the river  and was worn at one end as if dragged
along the ground in travelling  several other articles were also brought
down by the current  which indicate that the indians are probably at no
great distance above us  and judging from a football which resembles
those used by the minnetarees near the mandans  we conjecture that they
must be a band of the minnetarees of fort de prairie  the appearance of
the river and the surrounding country continued as usual  till towards
evening  at about fifteen miles  we reached a large creek on the north
thirty five yards wide  discharging some water  and named after one of
our men thompson s creek  here the country assumed a totally different
aspect  the hills retired on both sides from the river  which now
spreads to more than three times its former size  and is filled with a
number of small handsome islands covered with cottonwood  the low
grounds on the river are again wide  fertile  and enriched with trees 
those on the north are particularly wide  the hills being comparatively
low and opening into three large vallies  which extend themselves for a
considerable distance towards the north  these appearances of vegetation
are delightful after the dreary hills over which we have passed  and we
have now to congratulate ourselves at having escaped from the last
ridges of the black mountains  on leaving thompson s creek we passed two
small islands  and at twenty three miles distance encamped among some
timber on the north  opposite to a small creek  which we named bull
creek  the bighorn is in great quantities  and must bring forth their
young at a very early season  as they are now half grown  one of the
party saw a large bear also  but being at a distance from the river  and
having no timber to conceal him  he would not venture to fire 

wednesday  29  last night we were alarmed by a new sort of enemy  a
buffaloe swam over from the opposite side and to the spot where lay one
of our canoes  over which he clambered to the shore  then taking fright
he ran full speed up the bank towards our fires  and passed within
eighteen inches of the heads of some of the men  before the sentinel
could make him change his course  still more alarmed he ran down between
four fires and within a few inches of the heads of the second row of the
men  and would have broken into our lodge if the barking of the dog had
not stopped him  he suddenly turned to the right and was out of sight in
a moment  leaving us all in confusion  every one seizing his rifle and
inquiring the cause of the alarm  on learning what had happened  we had
to rejoice at suffering no more injury than the damage to some guns
which were in the canoe which the buffaloe crossed 

in the morning early we left our camp  and proceeded as usual by the
cord  we passed an island and two sandbars  and at the distance of two
and a half miles we came to a handsome river which discharges itself on
the south  and which we ascended to the distance of a mile and a half 
we called it judith s river  it rises in the rock mountains in about
the same place with the muscleshell and near the yellowstone river  its
entrance is one hundred yards wide from one bank to the other  the water
occupying about seventy five yards  and in greater quantity than that of
the muscleshell river  and though more rapid equally navigable  there
being no stones or rocks in the bed  which is composed entirely of
gravel and mud with some sand  the water too is clearer than any which
we have yet seen  and the low grounds  as far as we could discern  wider
and more woody than those of the missouri  along its banks we observed
some box alder intermixed with the cottonwood and the willow  the
undergrowth consisting of rosebushes  honeysuckle  and a little red
willow  there was a great abundance of the argalea or bighorned animals
in the high country through which it passes  and a great number of the
beaver in its waters  just above the entrance of it we saw the fires of
one hundred and twenty six lodges  which appeared to have been deserted
about twelve or fifteen days  and on the other side of the missouri a
large encampment  apparently made by the same nation  on examining some
moccasins which we found there  our indian woman said that they did not
belong to her own nation the snake indians  but she thought that they
indicated a tribe on this side of the rocky mountain  and to the north
of the missouri  indeed it is probable that these are the minnetarees of
fort de prairie  at the distance of six and a half miles the hills again
approach the brink of the river  and the stones and rocks washed down
from them form a very bad rapid  with rocks and ripples more numerous
and difficult than those we passed on the 27th and 28th  here the same
scene was renewed  and we had again to struggle and labour to preserve
our small craft from being lost  near this spot are a few trees of the
ash  the first we have seen for a great distance  and from which we
named the place ash rapids  on these hills there is but little timber 
but the salts  coal  and other mineral appearances continue  on the
north we passed a precipice about one hundred and twenty feet high 
under which lay scattered the fragments of at least one hundred carcases
of buffaloes  although the water which had washed away the lower part of
the hill must have carried off many of the dead  these buffaloe had been
chased down the precipice in a way very common on the missouri  and by
which vast herds are destroyed in a moment  the mode of hunting is to
select one of the most active and fleet young men  who is disguised by a
buffaloe skin round his body  the skin of the head with the ears and
horns fastened on his own head in such a way as to deceive the buffaloe 
thus dressed  he fixes himself at a convenient distant between a herd of
buffaloe and any of the river precipices  which sometimes extend for
some miles  his companions in the meantime get in the rear and side of
the herd  and at a given signal show themselves  and advance towards the
buffaloe  they instantly take the alarm  and finding the hunters beside
them  they run towards the disguised indian or decoy  who leads them on
at full speed toward the river  when suddenly securing himself in some
crevice of the cliff which he had previously fixed on  the herd is left
on the brink of the precipice  it is then in vain for the foremost to
retreat or even to stop  they are pressed on by the hindmost rank  who
seeing no danger but from the hunters  goad on those before them till
the whole are precipitated and the shore is strewn with their dead
bodies  sometimes in this perilous seduction the indian is himself
either trodden under root by the rapid movements of the buffaloe  or
missing his footing in the cliff is urged down the precipice by the
falling herd  the indians then select as much meat as they wish  and the
rest is abandoned to the wolves  and create a most dreadful stench  the
wolves who had been feasting on these carcases were very fat  and so
gentle that one of them was killed with an esponton  above this place we
came to for dinner at the distance of seventeen miles  opposite to a
bold running river of twenty yards wide  and falling in on the south 
from the objects we had just passed we called this stream slaughter
river  its low grounds are narrow  and contain scarcely any timber  soon
after landing it began to blow and rain  and as there was no prospect of
getting wood for fuel farther on  we fixed our camp on the north  three
quarters of a mile above slaughter river  after the labours of the day
we gave to each man a dram  and such was the effect of long abstinence
from spirituous liquors  that from the small quantity of half a gill of
rum  several of the men were considerably affected by it  and all very
much exhilirated  our game to day consisted of an elk and two beaver 

thursday  30  the rain which commenced last evening continued with
little intermission till eleven this morning  when the high wind which
accompanied it having abated  we set out  more rain has now fallen than
we have had since the 1st of september last  and many circumstances
indicate our approach to a climate differing considerably from that of
the country through which we have been passing  the air of the open
country is astonishingly dry and pure  observing that the case of our
sextant  though perfectly seasoned  shrank and the joints opened  we
tried several experiments  by which it appeared that a tablespoon full
of water exposed in a saucer to the air would evaporate in thirty six
hours  when the mercury did not stand higher than the temperate point at
the greatest heat of the day  the river  notwithstanding the rain  is
much clearer than it was a few days past  but we advance with great
labour and difficulty  the rapid current  the ripples and rocky points
rendering the navigation more embarrassing than even that of yesterday 
in addition to which the banks are now so slippery after the rain  that
the men who draw the canoes can scarcely walk  and the earth and stone
constantly falling down the high bluffs make it dangerous to pass under
them  still however we are obliged to make use of the cord  as the wind
is strong ahead  the current too rapid for oars  and too deep for the
pole  in this way we passed at the distance of five and a half miles a
small rivulet in a bend on the north  two miles further an island on the
same side  half a mile beyond which came to a grove of trees at the
entrance of a run in a bend to the south  and encamped for the night on
the northern shore  the eight miles which we made to day cost us much
trouble  the air was cold and rendered more disagreeable by the rain 
which fell in several slight showers in the course of the day  our cords
too broke several times  but fortunately without injury to the boats  on
ascending the hills near the river  one of the party found that there
was snow mixed with the rain on the heights  a little back of these the
country becomes perfectly level on both sides of the river  there is now
no timber on the hills  and only a few scattering cottonwood  ash 
box alder  and willows  along the water  in the course of the day we
passed several encampments of indians  the most recent of which seemed
to have been evacuated about five weeks since  and from the several
apparent dates we supposed that they were made by a band of about one
hundred lodges who were travelling slowly up the river  although no part
of the missouri from the minnetarees to this place exhibit signs of
permanent settlements  yet none seem exempt from the transient visits of
hunting parties  we know that the minnetarees of the missouri extend
their excursions on the south side of the river  as high as the
yellowstone  and the assiniboins visit the northern side  most probably
as high as porcupine river  all the lodges between that place and the
rocky mountains we supposed to belong to the minnetarees of fort de
prairie  who live on the south fork of the saskashawan 

friday  31  we proceeded in two periogues  leaving the canoes to bring
on the meat of two buffaloes killed last evening  soon after we set off
it began to rain  and though it ceased at noon  the weather continued
cloudy during the rest of the day  the obstructions of yesterday still
remain and fatigue the men excessively  the banks are so slippery in
some places and the mud so adhesive that they are unable to wear their
moccasins  one fourth of the time they are obliged to be up to their
armpits in the cold water  and sometimes walk for several yards over the
sharp fragments of rocks which have fallen from the hills  all this
added to the burden of dragging the heavy canoes is very painful  yet
the men bear it with great patience and good humour  once the rope of
one of the periogues  the only one we had made of hemp  broke short  and
the periogue swung and just touched a point of rock which almost overset
her  at nine miles we came to a high wall of black rock rising from the
water s edge on the south  above the cliffs of the river  this continued
about a quarter of a mile  and was succeeded by a high open plain  till
three miles further a second wall two hundred feet high rose on the same
side  three miles further a wall of the same kind about two hundred feet
high and twelve in thickness  appeared to the north  these hills and
river cliffs exhibit a most extraordinary and romantic appearance  they
rise in most places nearly perpendicular from the water  to the height
of between two and three hundred feet  and are formed of very white
sandstone  so soft as to yield readily to the impression of water  in
the upper part of which lie imbedded two or three thin horizontal
stratas of white freestone insensible to the rain  and on the top is a
dark rich loam  which forms a gradually ascending plain  from a mile to
a mile and a half in extent  when the hills again rise abruptly to the
height of about three hundred feet more  in trickling down the cliffs 
the water has worn the soft sandstone into a thousand grotesque figures 
among which with a little fancy may be discerned elegant ranges of
freestone buildings  with columns variously sculptured  and supporting
long and elegant galleries  while the parapets are adorned with
statuary  on a nearer approach they represent every form of elegant
ruins  columns  some with pedestals and capitals entire  others
mutilated and prostrate  and some rising pyramidally over each other
till they terminate in a sharp point  these are varied by niches 
alcoves  and the customary appearances of desolated magnificence  the
allusion is increased by the number of martins  who have built their
globular nests in the niches and hover over these columns  as in our
country they are accustomed to frequent large stone structures  as we
advance there seems no end to the visionary enchantment which surrounds
us  in the midst of this fantastic scenery are vast ranges of walls 
which seem the productions of art  so regular is the workmanship  they
rise perpendicularly from the river  sometimes to the height of one
hundred feet  varying in thickness from one to twelve feet  being
equally broad at the top as below  the stones of which they are formed
are black  thick  and durable  and composed of a large portion of earth 
intermixed and cemented with a small quantity of sand  and a
considerable proportion of talk or quartz  these stones are almost
invariably regular parallelipeds of unequal sizes in the wall  but
equally deep  and laid regularly in ranges over each other like bricks 
each breaking and covering the interstice of the two on which it rests 
but though the perpendicular interstice be destroyed  the horizontal one
extends entirely through the whole work  the stones too are proportioned
to the thickness of the wall in which they are employed  being largest
in the thickest walls  the thinner walls are composed of a single depth
of the paralleliped  while the thicker ones consist of two or more
depths  these walls pass the river at several places  rising from the
water s edge much above the sandstone bluffs which they seem to
penetrate  thence they cross in a straight line on either side of the
river  the plains over which they tower to the height of from ten to
seventy feet  until they lose themselves in the second range of hills 
sometimes they run parallel in several ranges near to each other 
sometimes intersect each other at right angles  and have the appearance
of walls of ancient houses or gardens 

the face of some of these river hills  is composed of very excellent
freestone of a light yellowish brown colour  and among the cliffs we
found a species of pine which we had not yet seen  and differing from
the virginia pitchpine in having a shorter leaf  and a longer and more
pointed cone  the coal appears only in small quantities  as do the burnt
earth and pumicestone  the mineral salts have abated  among the animals
are a great number of the bighorn  a few buffaloe and elk  and some
mule deer  but none of the common deer nor any antelopes  we saw but
could not procure a beautiful fox  of a colour varied with orange 
yellow  white  and black  rather smaller than the common fox of this
country  and about the same size as the red fox of the united states 

the river to day has been from about one hundred and fifty to two
hundred and fifty yards wide  with but little timber  at the distance of
two miles and a half from the last stone wall  is a stream on the north
side  twenty eight yards in width  and with some running water  we
encamped just above its mouth having made eighteen miles 

saturday  june 1  the weather was cloudy with a few drops of rain  as we
proceeded by the aid of our cord we found the river cliffs and bluffs
not so high as yesterday  and the country more level  the timber too is
in greater abundance on the river  though there is no wood on the high
ground  coal however appears in the bluffs  the river is from two
hundred to two hundred and fifty feet wide  the current more gentle  the
water becoming still clearer and fewer rocky points and shoals than we
met yesterday  though those which we did encounter were equally
difficult to pass  game is by no means in such plenty as below  all that
we obtained were one bighorn  and a mule deer though we saw in the
plains a quantity of buffaloe  particularly near a small lake about
eight miles from the river to the south  notwithstanding the wind was
ahead all day  we dragged the canoes along the distance of twenty three
miles  at fourteen and a quarter miles  we came to a small island
opposite a bend of the river to the north  two and a half miles to the
upper point of a small island on the north  five miles to another island
on the south side and opposite to a bluff  in the next two miles we
passed an island on the south  a second beyond it on the north  and
reached near a high bluff on the north a third on which we encamped 
in the plains near the river are the chokecherry  yellow and red
currant bushes  as well as the wild rose and prickly pear  both of which
are now in bloom  from the tops of the river hills  which are lower
than usual  we enjoyed a delightful view of the rich fertile plains on
both sides  in many places extending from the river cliffs to a great
distance back  in these plains we meet occasionally large banks of pure
sand  which were driven apparently by the southwest winds  and there
deposited  the plains are more fertile some distance from the river
than near its banks  where the surface of the earth is very generally
strewed with small pebbles  which appear to be smoothed and worn by the
agitation of the waters with which they were no doubt once covered  a
mountain or part of the north mountain approaches the river within
eight or ten miles  bearing north from our encampment of last evening 
and this morning a range of high mountains bearing s w  from us and
apparently running to the westward  are seen at a great distance covered
with snow  in the evening we had a little more rain 

sunday 2  the wind blew violently last night  and a slight shower of
rain fell  but this morning was fair  we set out at an early hour  and
although the wind was ahead by means of the cord went on much better
than for the last two days  as the banks were well calculated for
towing  the current of the river is strong but regular  its timber
increases in quantity  the low grounds become more level and extensive 
and the bluffs on the river are lower than usual  in the course of the
day we had a small shower of rain  which lasted a few minutes only  as
the game is very abundant we think it necessary to begin a collection
of hides for the purpose of making a leathern boat  which we intend
constructing shortly  the hunters who were out the greater part of the
day brought in six elk  two buffaloe  two mule deer and a bear  this
last animal had nearly cost us the lives of two of our hunters who were
together when he attacked them  one of them narrowly escaped being
caught  and the other after running a considerable distance  concealed
himself in some thick bushes  and while the bear was in quick pursuit of
his hiding place  his companion came up and fortunately shot the animal
through the head 

at six and at half miles we reached an island on the northern side  one
mile and a quarter thence is a timbered low ground on the south  and in
the next two and three quarter miles we passed three small islands  and
came to a dark bluff on the south  within the following mile are two
small islands on the same side  at three and a quarter miles we reached
the lower part of a much larger island near a northern point  and as we
coasted along its side  within two miles passed a smaller island  and
half a mile above reached the head of another  all these islands are
small  and most of them contain some timber  three quarters of a mile
beyond the last  and at the distance of eighteen miles from our
encampment  we came to for the night in a handsome low cottonwood plain
on the south  where we remained for the purpose of making some celestial
observations during the night  and of examining in the morning a large
river which comes in opposite to us  accordingly at an early hour 

monday  3d  we crossed and fixed our camp in the point  formed by the
junction of the river with the missouri  it now became an interesting
question which of these two streams is what the minnetarees call
ahmateahza or the missouri  which they described as approaching very
near to the columbia  on our right decision much of the fate of the
expedition depends  since if after ascending to the rocky mountains or
beyond them  we should find that the river we were following did not
come near the columbia  and be obliged to return  we should not only
lose the travelling season  two months of which had already elapsed  but
probably dishearten the men so much as to induce them either to abandon
the enterprise  or yield us a cold obedience instead of the warm and
zealous support which they had hitherto afforded us  we determined 
therefore  to examine well before we decided on our future course  and
for this purpose despatched two canoes with three men up each of the
streams with orders to ascertain the width  depth  and rapidity of the
current  so as to judge of their comparative bodies of water  at the
same time parties were sent out by land to penetrate the country  and
discover from the rising grounds  if possible  the distant bearings of
the two rivers  and all were directed to return towards evening  while
they were gone we ascended together the high grounds in the fork of
these two rivers  whence we had a very extensive prospect of the
surrounding country  on every side it was spread into one vast plain
covered with verdure  in which innumerable herds of buffaloe were
roaming  attended by their enemies the wolves  some flocks of elk also
were seen  and the solitary antelopes were scattered with their young
over the face of the plain  to the south was a range of lofty mountains 
which we supposed to be a continuation of the south mountain  stretching
themselves from southeast to northwest  and terminating abruptly about
southwest from us  these were partially covered with snow  but at a
great distance behind them was a more lofty ridge completely covered
with snow  which seemed to follow the same direction as the first 
reaching from west to the north of northwest  where their snowy tops
were blended with the horizon  the direction of the rivers could not
however be long distinguished  as they were soon lost in the extent of
the plain  on our return we continued our examination  the width of the
north branch is two hundred yards  that of the south is three hundred
and seventy two  the north  although narrower and with a gentler
current  is deeper than the south  its waters too are of the same
whitish brown colour  thickness  and turbidness  they run in the same
boiling and rolling manner which has uniformly characterized the
missouri  and its bed is composed of some gravel  but principally mud 
the south fork is deeper  but its waters are perfectly transparent  its
current is rapid  but the surface smooth and unruffled  and its bed too
is composed of round and flat smooth stones like those of rivers issuing
from a mountainous country  the air and character of the north fork so
much resemble those of the missouri that almost all the party believe
that to be the true course to be pursued  we however  although we have
given no decided opinion  are inclined to think otherwise  because 
although this branch does give the colour and character to the missouri 
yet these very circumstances induce an opinion that it rises in and runs
through an open plain country  since if it came from the mountains it
would be clearer  unless  which from the position of the country is
improbable  it passed through a vast extent of low ground after leaving
them  we thought it probable that it did not even penetrate the rocky
mountains  but drew it sources from the open country towards the lower
and middle parts of the saskashawan  in a direction north of this place 
what embarrasses us most is  that the indians who appeared to be well
acquainted with the geography of the country  have not mentioned this
northern river  for  the river which scolds at all others   as it is
termed  must be according to their account one of the rivers which we
have passed  and if this north fork be the missouri  why have they not
designated the south branch which they must also have passed  in order
to reach the great falls which they mention on the missouri  in the
evening our parties returned  after ascending the rivers in canoes for
some distance  then continuing on foot  just leaving themselves time to
return by night  the north fork was less rapid  and therefore afforded
the easiest navigation  the shallowest water of the north was five feet
deep  that of the south six feet  at two and a half miles up the north
fork is a small river coming in on the left or western side  sixty feet
wide  with a bold current three feet in depth  the party by land had
gone up the south fork in a straight line  somewhat north of west for
seven miles  where they discovered that this little river came within
one hundred yards of the south fork  and on returning down it found it a
handsome stream  with as much timber as either of the larger rivers 
consisting of the narrow and wide leafed cottonwood  some birch and
box alder  amid undergrowth of willows  rosebushes  and currants  they
also saw on this river a great number of elk and some beaver 

all these accounts were however very far from deciding the important
question of our future route  and we therefore determined each of us to
ascend one of the rivers during a day and a half s march  or farther if
necessary  for our satisfaction  our hunters killed two buffaloe  six
elk  and four deer to day  along the plains near the junction  are to be
found the prickly pear in great quantities  the chokecherry is also very
abundant in the river low grounds  as well as the ravines along the
river bluffs  the yellow and red currants are not yet ripe  the
gooseberry is beginning to ripen  and the wildrose which now covers all
the low grounds near the rivers is in full bloom  the fatigues of the
last few days have occasioned some falling off in the appearance of the
men  who not having been able to wear moccasins  had their feet much
bruised and mangled in passing over the stones and rough ground  they
are however perfectly cheerful  and have an undiminished ardour for the
expedition 

tuesday  june 4  at the same hour this morning captain lewis and captain
clarke set out to explore the two rivers  captain lewis with six men
crossed the north fork near the camp  below a small island from which
he took a course n  30 degrees w  for four and a half miles to a
commanding eminence  here we observed that the north mountain  changing
its direction parallel to the missouri  turned towards the north and
terminated abruptly at the distance of about thirty miles  the point of
termination bearing n  48 degrees e  the south mountain too diverges to
the south  and terminates abruptly  its extremity bearing s  8 degrees
w  distant about twenty miles  to the right of  and retreating from this
extremity  is a separate mountain at the distance of thirty five miles
in a direction s  38 degrees w  which from its resemblance to the roof
of a barn  we called the barn mountain  the north fork  which is now on
the left  makes a considerable bend to the northwest  and on its western
border a range of hills about ten miles long  and bearing from this spot
n  60 degrees w  runs parallel with it  north of this range of hills is
an elevated point of the river bluff on its south side  bearing n  72
degrees w  about twelve miles from us  towards this he directed his
course across a high  level  dry open plain  which in fact embraces the
whole country to the foot of the mountains  the soil is dark  rich  and
fertile  yet the grass by no means so luxuriant as might have been
expected  for it is short and scarcely more than sufficient to cover the
ground  there are vast quantities of prickly pears  and myriads of
grasshoppers  which afford food for a species of curlew which is in
great numbers in the plain  he then proceeded up the river to the point
of observation they had fixed on  from which he went two miles n  15
degrees w  to a bluff point on the north side of the river  thence his
course was n  30 degrees w  for two miles to the entrance of a large
creek on the south  the part of the river along which he passed is from
forty to sixty yards wide  the current strong  the water deep and
turbid  the banks falling in  the salts  coal and mineral appearances
are as usual  and in every respect  except as to size  this river
resembles the missouri  the low grounds are narrow but well supplied
with wood  the bluffs are principally of dark brown yellow  and some
white clay with freestone in some places  from this point the river bore
n  20 degrees e  to a bluff on the south  at the distance of twelve
miles  towards this he directed his course  ascending the hills which
are about two hundred feet high  and passing through plains for three
miles  till he found the dry ravines so steep and numerous that he
resolved to return to the river and follow its banks  he reached it
about four miles from the beginning of his course  and encamped on the
north in a bend among some bushes which sheltered the party from the
wind  the air was very cold  the northwest wind high  and the rain wet
them to the skin  besides the game just mentioned  he observed buffaloe 
elk  wolves  foxes  and we got a blaireau and a weasel  and wounded a
large brown bear  whom it was too late to pursue  along the river are
immense quantities of roses which are now in full bloom  and which make
the low grounds a perfect garden 

wednesday 5  the rain fell during the greater part of the last night 
and in the morning the weather was cloudy and cold  with a high
northwest wind  at sunrise he proceeded up the river eight miles to the
bluff on the left side  towards which he had been directing his course
yesterday  here he found the bed of a creek twenty five yards wide at
the entrance  with some timber  but no water  notwithstanding the rain 
it is  indeed  astonishing to observe the vast quantities of water
absorbed by the soil of the plains  which being opened in large crevices
presents a fine rich loam  at the mouth of this stream  which he called
lark creek  the bluffs are very steep and approach the river so that he
ascended them  and crossing the plains reached the river  which from the
last point bore n  50 degrees w  four miles from this place it extended
north two miles  here he discovered a lofty mountain standing alone at
the distance of more than eighty miles in the direction of n  30 degrees
w  and which from its conical figure he called tower mountain  he then
proceeded on these two hills and afterwards in different courses six
miles  when he again changed for a western course across a deep bend
along the south side  in making this passage over the plains he found
them like those of yesterday  level and beautiful  with great quantities
of buffaloes  and some wolves  foxes  and antelopes  and intersected
near the river by deep ravines  here at the distance of from one to nine
miles from the river  he met the largest village of barking squirrels
which we had yet seen  for he passed a skirt of their territory for
seven miles  he also saw near the hills a flock of the mountain cock or
a large species of heath hen with a long pointed tail  which the indians
below had informed us were common among the rock mountains  having
finished his course of ten miles west across a bend  he continued two
miles n  80 degrees w  and from that point discovered some lofty
mountains to the northwest of tower mountain and bearing n  65 degrees
w  at eighty or one hundred miles distance  here he encamped on the
north side in a handsome low ground  on which were several old stick
lodges  there had been but little timber on the river in the forepart of
the day  but now there is a greater quantity than usual  the river
itself is about eighty yards wide  from six to ten feet deep  and has a
strong steady current  the party had killed five elk  and a mule deer 
and by way of experiment roasted the burrowing squirrels  which they
found to be well flavoured and tender 

thursday 6  captain lewis was now convinced that this river pursued a
direction too far north for our route to the pacific  and therefore
resolved to return  but waited till noon to take a meridian altitude 
the clouds  however  which had gathered during the latter part of the
night continued and prevented the observation  part of the men were sent
forward to a commanding eminence  six miles s  70 degrees w  from which
they saw at the distance of about fifteen miles s  80 degrees w  a point
of the south bluff of the river  which thence bore northwardly  in their
absence two rafts had been prepared  and when they returned about noon 
the party embarked  but they soon found that the rafts were so small and
slender that the baggage was wet  and therefore it was necessary to
abandon them  and go by land  they therefore crossed the plains  and at
the distance of twelve miles came to the river  through a cold storm
from the northeast  accompanied by showers of rain  the abruptness of
the cliffs compelled them  after going a few miles  to leave the river
and meet the storm in the plains  here they directed their course too
far northward  in consequence of which they did not meet the river till
late at night  after having travelled twenty three miles since noon  and
halted at a little below the entrance of lark creek  they had the good
fortune to kill two buffaloe which supplied them with supper  but spent
a very uncomfortable night without any shelter from the rain  which
continued till morning 

friday 7  when at an early hour they continued down the river  the route
was extremely unpleasant  as the wind was high from the n e  accompanied
with rain  which made the ground so slippery that they were unable to
walk over the bluffs which they had passed on ascending the river  the
land is the most thirsty we have ever seen  notwithstanding all the rain
which has fallen  the earth is not wet for more than two inches deep 
and resembles thawed ground  but if it requires more water to saturate
it than the common soils  on the other hand it yields its moisture with
equal difficulty  in passing along the side of one of these bluffs at a
narrow pass thirty yards in length  captain lewis slipped  and but for a
fortunate recovery  by means of his espontoon  would then have been
precipitated into the river over a precipice of about ninety feet  he
had just reached a spot where by the assistance of his espontoon he
could stand with tolerable safety  when he heard a voice behind him cry
out  good god captain what shall i do  he turned instantly and found it
was windsor who had lost his foothold about the middle of the narrow
pass  and had slipped down to the very verge of the precipice where he
lay on his belly  with his right arm and leg over the precipice  while
with the other leg and arm he was with difficulty holding on to keep
himself from being dashed to pieces below  his dreadful situation was
instantly perceived by captain lewis  who stifling his alarm  calmly
told him that he was in no danger  that he should take his knife out of
his belt with the right hand  and dig a hole in the side of the bluff to
receive his right foot  with great presence of mind he did this  and
then raised himself on his knees  captain lewis then told him to take
off his moccasins and come forward on his hands and knees  holding the
knife in one hand and his rifle in the other  he immediately crawled in
this way till he came to a secure spot  the men who had not attempted
this passage  were ordered to return and wade the river at the foot of
the bluff  where they found the water breast high  this adventure taught
them the danger of crossing the slippery heights of the river  but as
the plains were intersected by deep ravines almost as difficult to pass 
they continued down the river  sometimes in the mud of the low grounds 
sometimes up to their arms in the water  and when it became too deep to
wade  they cut footholds with their knives in the sides of the banks  in
this way they travelled through the rain  mud  and water  and having
made only eighteen miles during the whole day  encamped in an old indian
lodge of sticks  which afforded them a dry shelter  here they cooked
part of six deer they had killed in the course of their walk  and having
eaten the only morsel they had tasted during the whole day slept
comfortably on some willow boughs 




                                chapter x 

     return of captain lewis  account of captain clarke s researches
     with his exploring party  perilous situation of one of his
     party  tansy river described  the party still believing the
     southern fork the missouri  captain lewis resolves to ascend
     it  mode of making a place to deposit provisions  called
     cache  captain lewis explores the southern fork  falls of the
     missouri discovered  which ascertains the question  romantic
     scenery of the surrounding country  narrow escape of captain
     lewis  the main body under captain clarke approach within five
     miles of the falls  and prepare for making a portage over the
     rapids 


saturday 8  it continued to rain moderately all last night  and the
morning was cloudy till about ten o clock  when it cleared off  and
became a fine day  they breakfasted about sunrise and then proceeded
down the river in the same way as they had done yesterday  except that
the travelling was somewhat better  as they had not so often to wade 
though they passed some very dangerous bluffs  the only timber to be
found is in the low grounds which are occasionally on the river  and
these are the haunts of innumerable birds  who  when the sun began to
shine  sang very delightfully  among these birds they distinguished the
brown thrush  robin  turtledove  linnet  goldfinch  the large and small
blackbird  the wren  and some others  as they came along  the whole of
the party were of opinion that this river was the true missouri  but
captain lewis being fully persuaded that it was neither the main stream 
nor that which it would be advisable to ascend  gave it the name of
maria s river  after travelling all day they reached the camp at five
o clock in the afternoon  and found captain clarke and the party very
anxious for their safety  as they had staid two days longer than had
been expected  and as captain clarke had returned at the appointed time 
it was feared that they had met with some accident 

captain clarke on setting out with five men on the 4th  went seven
miles on a course s  25 degrees w  to a spring  thence he went s  20
degrees w  for eight miles to the river where was an island  from which
he proceeded in a course n  45 degrees w  and approached the river at
the distance of three  five  and thirteen miles  at which place they
encamped in an old indian lodge made of sticks and bark  in crossing the
plains they observed several herds of buffaloe  some muledeer  antelopes
and wolves  the river is rapid and closely hemmed in by high bluffs 
crowded with bars of gravel  with little timber on the low grounds  and
none on the highlands  near the camp this evening  a white bear attacked
one of the men  whose gun happening to be wet  would not go off  he
instantly made towards a tree  but was so closely pursued  that as he
ascended the tree he struck the bear with his foot  the bear not being
able to climb  waited till he should be forced to come down  and as the
rest of the party were separated from him by a perpendicular cliff of
rocks  which they could not descend  it was not in their power to give
him any assistance  fortunately however at last the bear became frighted
at their cries and firing  and released the man  in the afternoon it
rained  and during the night there fell both rain and snow  and in the
morning 

june 5  the hills to the s e  were covered with snow  and the rain
continued  they proceeded on in a course n  20 degrees w  near the river
several miles  till at the distance of eleven miles they reached a
ridge  from the top of which on the north side they could plainly
discern a mountain to the s  and w  at a great distance covered with
snow  a high ridge projecting from the mountains to the southeast
approaches the river on the southeast side  forming some cliffs of dark
hard stone  they also saw that the river ran for a great distance west
of south  with a rapid current  from which as well as its continuing of
the same width and depth  captain clarke thought it useless to advance
any further  and therefore returned across the level plain in a
direction north 30 degrees east  and reached at the distance of twenty
miles the little river which is already mentioned as falling into the
north fork  and to which they gave the name of tansy river  from the
great quantity of that herb growing on its banks  here they dined  and
then proceeded on a few miles by a place where the tansy breaks through
a high ridge on its north side and encamped 

the next day  6th  the weather was cold  raw and cloudy  with a high
northeast wind  they set out early  down the tansy  whose low grounds
resemble precisely  except as to extent  those of the missouri before it
branches  containing a great proportion of a species of cottonwood  with
a leaf like that of the wild cherry  after halting at twelve o clock for
dinner  they ascended the plain  and at five o clock reached the camp
through the rain  which had fallen without intermission since noon 
during his absence the party had been occupied in dressing skins  and
being able to rest themselves were nearly freed from their lameness and
swollen feet  all this night and the whole of the following day  7th  it
rained  the wind being from the southwest off the mountains  yet the
rivers are falling  and the thermometer 40 degrees above 0  the rain
continued till the next day  8th  at ten o clock  when it cleared off 
and the weather became fine  the wind high from the southwest  the
rivers at the point have now fallen six inches since our arrival  and
this morning the water of the south fork became of a reddish brown
colour  while the north branch continued of its usual whitish
appearance  the mountains to the south are covered with snow 

sunday  9th  we now consulted upon the course to be pursued  on
comparing our observations  we were more than ever convinced of what we
already suspected  that mr  arrowsmith is incorrect in laying down in
the chain of rocky mountains one remarkable mountain called the tooth 
nearly as far south as 45 degrees  and said to be so marked from the
discoveries of mr  fidler  we are now within one hundred miles of the
rocky  mountains and in the latitude of 47 degrees 24  12  8  and
therefore it is highly improbable that the missouri should make such a
bend to the south before it reaches the rocky mountains  as to have
suffered mr  fidler to come as low as 45 degrees along the eastern
borders without touching that river  yet the general course of maria s
river from this place for fifty nine miles  as far as captain lewis
ascended  was north 69 degrees west  and the south branch  or what we
consider the missouri  which captain clarke had examined as far as
forty five miles in a straight line  ran in a course south 29 degrees
west  and as far as it could be seen went considerably west of south 
whence we conclude that the missouri itself enters the rocky mountains
to the north of 45 degrees  in writing to the president from our winter
quarters  we had already taken the liberty of advancing the southern
extremity of mr  fidler s discoveries about a degree to the northward 
and this from indian information as to the bearing of the point at which
the missouri enters the mountain  but we think actual observation will
place it one degree still further to the northward  this information of
mr  fidler however  incorrect as it is  affords an additional reason for
not pursuing maria s river  for if he came as low even as 47 degrees and
saw only small streams coming down from the mountains  it is to be
presumed that these rivulets do not penetrate the rocky mountains so far
as to approach any navigable branch of the columbia  and they are most
probably the remote waters of some northern branch of the missouri  in
short  being already in latitude 47 degrees 24  we cannot reasonably
hope by going farther to the northward to find between this place and
the saskashawan any stream which can  as the indians assure us the
missouri does  possess a navigable current for some distance in the
rocky mountains  the indians had assured us also that the water of the
missouri was nearly transparent at the falls  this is the case with the
southern branch  that the falls lay a little to the south of sunset
from them  this too is in favour of the southern fork  for it bears
considerably south of this place which is only a few minutes to the
northward of fort mandan  that the falls are below the rocky mountains
and near the northern termination of one range of those mountains  now
there is a ridge of mountains which appear behind the south mountains
and terminates to the southwest of us  at a sufficient distance from the
unbroken chain of the rocky mountains to allow space for several falls 
indeed we fear for too many of them  if too the indians had ever passed
any stream as large as this southern fork on their way up the missouri 
they would have mentioned it  so that their silence seems to prove that
this branch must be the missouri  the body of water also which it
discharges must have been acquired from a considerable distance in the
mountains  for it could not have been collected in the parched plains
between the yellowstone and the rocky mountains  since that country
could not supply nourishment for the dry channels which we passed on the
south  and the travels of mr  fidler forbid us to believe that it could
have been obtained from the mountains towards the northwest 

these observations which satisfied our mind completely we communicated
to the party  but every one of them were of a contrary opinion  and much
of their belief depended on crusatte  an experienced waterman on the
missouri  who gave it as his decided judgment that the north fork was
the genuine missouri  the men therefore mentioned that although they
would most cheerfully follow us wherever we should direct  yet they were
afraid that the south fork would soon terminate in the rocky mountains
and leave us at a great distance from the columbia  in order that
nothing might be omitted which could prevent our falling into an error 
it was agreed that one of us should ascend the southern branch by land
until we reached either the falls or the mountains  in the meantime in
order to lighten our burdens as much as possible  we determined to
deposit here one of the periogues and all the heavy baggage which we
could possibly spare  as well as some provision  salt  powder  and
tools  this would at once lighten the other boats  and give them the
crew which had been employed on board the periogue 

monday  10  the weather being fair and pleasant we dried all our baggage
and merchandize and made our deposit  these holes or  caches  as they
are called by the missouri traders are very common  particularly among
those who deal with the sioux  as the skins and merchandize will keep
perfectly sound for years  and are protected from robbery  our cache is
built in this manner  in the high plain on the north side of the
missouri and forty yards from a steep bluff  we chose a dry situation 
and then describing a small circle of about twenty inches diameter 
removed the sod as gently and carefully as possible  the hole is then
sunk perpendicularly for a foot deep  or more if the ground be not firm 
it is now worked gradually wider as they descend  till at length it
becomes six or seven feet deep  shaped nearly like a kettle or the lower
part of a large still with the bottom somewhat sunk at the centre  as
the earth is dug it is handed up in a vessel and carefully laid on a
skin or cloth  in which it is carried away and usually thrown into the
river or concealed so as to leave no trace of it  a floor of three or
four inches in thickness is then made of dry sticks  on which is thrown
hay or a hide perfectly dry  the goods being well aired and dried are
laid on this floor  and prevented from touching the wall by other dried
sticks in proportion as the merchandize is stowed away  when the hole is
nearly full  a skin is laid over the goods  and on this earth is thrown
and beaten down until with the addition of the sod first removed the
whole is on a level with the ground  and there remains not the slightest
appearance of an excavation  in addition to this we made another of
smaller dimensions  in which we placed all the baggage  some powder 
and our blacksmith s tools  having previously repaired such of the tools
we carry with us as require mending  to guard against accident  we hid
two parcels of lead and powder in the two distinct places  the red
periogue was drawn up on the middle of a small island at the entrance of
maria s river  and secured by being fastened to the trees from the
effect of any floods  in the evening there was a high wind from the
southwest accompanied with thunder and rain  we now made another
observation of the meridian altitude of the sun  and found that the mean
latitude of the entrance of maria s river  as deduced from three
observations  is 47 degrees 25  17  2 north  we saw a small bird like
the blue thrush or catbird which we had not before met  and also
observed that the beemartin or kingbird is common to this country
although there are no bees here  and in fact we have not met with the
honey bee since leaving the osage river 

tuesday 11  this morning captain lewis with four men set out on their
expedition up the south branch  they soon reached the point where the
tansy river approaches the missouri  and observing a large herd of elk
before them  descended and killed several which they hung up along the
river so that the party in the boats might see them as they came along 
they then halted for dinner  but captain lewis who had been for some
days afflicted with the dysentery  was now attacked with violent pains
attended by a high fever and was unable to go on  he therefore encamped
for the night under some willow boughs  having brought no medicine he
determined to try an experiment with the small twigs of the chokecherry 
which being stripped of their leaves and cut into pieces about two
inches long were boiled in pure water  till they produced a strong black
decoction of an astringent bitter taste  a pint of this he took at
sunset  and repeated the dose an hour afterwards  by ten o clock he was
perfectly relieved from pain  a gentle perspiration ensued  his fever
abated and in the morning he was quite recovered  one of the men caught
several dozen fish of two species  the first is about nine inches long 
of a white colour  round in shape  the mouth is beset both above and
below with a rim of fine sharp teeth  the eye moderately large  the
pupil dark  and the iris narrow  and of a yellowish brown colour  in
form and size it resembles the white chub of the potomac  though its
head is proportionably smaller  they readily bite at meat or
grasshoppers  but the flesh though soft and of a fine white colour is
not highly flavoured  the second species is precisely of the form and
about the size of the fish known by the name of the hickory shad or old
wife  though it differs from it in having the outer edge of both the
upper and lower jaw set with a rim of teeth  and the tongue and palate
also are defended by long sharp teeth bending inwards  the eye is very
large  the iris wide and of a silvery colour  they do not inhabit muddy
water  and the flavour is much superior to that of the former species 
of the first kind we had seen a few before we reached maria s river  but
had found none of the last before we caught them in the missouri above
its junction with that river  the white cat continues as high as maria s
river  but they are scarce in this part of the river  nor have we caught
any of them since leaving the mandans which weighed more than six
pounds 

of other game they saw a great abundance even in their short march of
nine miles 

wednesday 12  this morning captain lewis left the bank of the river in
order to avoid the steep ravines which generally run from the shore to
the distance of one or two miles in the plain  having reached the opened
country he went for twelve miles in a course a little to the west of
southwest  when the sun becoming warm by nine o clock  he returned to
the river in quest of water and to kill something for breakfast  there
being no water in the plain  and the buffaloe discovering them before
they came within gunshot took to flight  they reached the banks in a
handsome open low ground with cottonwood  after three miles walk  here
they saw two large brown bears  and killed them both at the first fire 
a circumstance which has never before occurred since we have seen that
animal  having made a meal of a part and hung the remainder on a tree
with a note for captain clarke  they again ascended the bluffs into the
open plains  here they saw great numbers of the burrowing squirrel  also
some wolves  antelopes  muledeer  and vast herds of buffaloe  they soon
crossed a ridge considerably higher than the surrounding plains  and
from its top had a beautiful view of the rocky mountains  which are now
completely covered with snow  their general course is from southeast to
the north of northwest  and they seem to consist of several ranges which
successively rise above each other till the most distant mingles with
the clouds  after travelling twelve miles they again met the river 
where there was a handsome plain of cottonwood  and although it was not
sunset  and they had only come twenty seven miles  yet captain lewis
felt weak from his late disorder  and therefore determined to go no
further that night  in the course of the day they killed a quantity of
game  and saw some signs of otter as well as beaver  and many tracks of
the brown bear  they also caught great quantities of the white fish
mentioned yesterday  with the broad leafed cottonwood  which has formed
the principal timber of the missouri  is here mixed another species
differing from the first only in the narrowness of its leaf and the
greater thickness of its bark  the leaf is long  oval  acutely pointed 
about two and a half or three inches long and from three quarters of an
inch to an inch in width  it is smooth and thick sometimes slightly
grooved or channeled with the margin a little serrate  the upper disk of
a common  the lower of a whitish green  this species seems to be
preferred by the beaver to the broad leaved  probably because the former
affords a deeper and softer bark 

thursday 13  they left their encampment at sunrise  and ascending the
river hills went for six miles in a course generally southwest  over a
country which though more waving than that of yesterday may still be
considered level  at the extremity of this course they overlooked a most
beautiful plain  where were infinitely more buffaloe than we had ever
before seen at a single view  to the southwest arose from the plain two
mountains of a singular appearance and more like ramparts of high
fortifications than works of nature  they are square figures with sides
rising perpendicularly to the height of two hundred and fifty feet 
formed of yellow clay  and the tops seemed to be level plains  finding
that the river here bore considerably to the south  and fearful of
passing the falls before reaching the rocky mountains  they now changed
their course to the south  and leaving those insulated hills to the
right proceeded across the plain  in this direction captain lewis had
gone about two miles when his ears were saluted with the agreeable sound
of a fall of water  and as he advanced a spray which seemed driven by
the high southwest wind arose above the plain like a column of smoke and
vanished in an instant  towards this point he directed his steps  and
the noise increasing as he approached soon became too tremendous to be
mistaken for any thing but the great falls of the missouri  having
travelled seven miles after first hearing the sound he reached the falls
about twelve o clock  the hills as he approached were difficult of
access and two hundred feet high  down these he hurried with impatience
and seating himself on some rocks under the centre of the falls  enjoyed
the sublime spectacle of this stupendous object which has since the
creation had been lavishing its magnificence upon the desert  unknown to
civilization 

                  illustration  the falls and portage 

the river immediately at its cascade is three hundred yards wide  and is
pressed in by a perpendicular cliff on the left  which rises to about
one hundred feet and extends up the stream for a mile  on the right the
bluff is also perpendicular for three hundred yards above the falls 
for ninety or a hundred yards from the left cliff  the water falls in
one smooth even sheet  over a precipice of at least eighty feet  the
remaining part of the river precipitates itself with a more rapid
current  but being received as it falls by the irregular and somewhat
projecting rocks below  forms a splendid prospect of perfectly white
foam two hundred yards in length  and eighty in perpendicular elevation 
this spray is dissipated into a thousand shapes  sometimes flying up in
columns of fifteen or twenty feet  which are then oppressed by larger
masses of the white foam  on all which the sun impresses the brightest
colours of the rainbow  as it rises from the fall it beats with fury
against a ledge of rocks which extend across the river at one hundred
and fifty yards from the precipice  from the perpendicular cliff on the
north  to the distance of one hundred and twenty yards  the rocks rise
only a few feet above the water  and when the river is high the stream
finds a channel across them forty yards wide  and near the higher parts
of the ledge which then rise about twenty feet  and terminate abruptly
within eighty or ninety yards of the southern side  between them and the
perpendicular cliff on the south  the whole body of water runs with
great swiftness  a few small cedars grow near this ridge of rocks which
serves as a barrier to defend a small plain of about three acres shaded
with cottonwood  at the lower extremity of which is a grove of the same
tree  where are several indian cabins of sticks  below the point of them
the river is divided by a large rock  several feet above the surface of
the water  and extending down the stream for twenty yards  at the
distance of three hundred yards from the same ridge is a second abutment
of solid perpendicular rock about sixty feet high  projecting at right
angles from the small plain on the north for one hundred and thirty four
yards into the river  after leaving this  the missouri again spreads
itself to its usual distance of three hundred yards  though with more
than its ordinary rapidity 

the hunters who had been sent out now returned loaded with buffaloe
meat  and captain lewis encamped for the night under a tree near the
falls  the men were again despatched to hunt for food against the
arrival of the party  and captain lewis walked down the river to
discover if possible some place where the canoes might be safely drawn
on shore  in order to be transported beyond the falls  he returned
however without discovering any such spot  the river for three miles
below being one continued succession of rapids and cascades  overhung
with perpendicular bluffs from one hundred and fifty to two hundred feet
high  in short  it seems to have worn itself a channel through the solid
rock  in the afternoon they caught in the falls some of both kinds of
the white fish  and half a dozen trout from sixteen to twenty three
inches long  precisely resembling in form and the position of its fins
the mountain or speckled trout of the united states  except that the
specks of the former are of a deep black  while those of the latter are
of a red or gold colour  they have long sharp teeth on the palate and
tongue  and generally a small speck of red on each side behind the front
ventral fins  the flesh is of a pale yellowish red  or when in good
order of a rose coloured red 

friday 14  this morning one of the men was sent to captain clarke with
an account of the discovery of the falls  and after employing the rest
in preserving the meat which had been killed yesterday  captain lewis
proceeded to examine the rapids above  from the falls he directed his
course southwest up the river  after passing one continued rapid  and
three small cascades  each three or four feet high  he reached at the
distance of five miles a second fall  the river is about four hundred
yards wide  and for the distance of three hundred throws itself over to
the depth of nineteen feet  and so irregularly that he gave it the name
of the crooked falls  from the southern shore it extends obliquely
upwards about one hundred and fifty yards  and then forms an acute angle
downwards nearly to the commencement of four small islands close to the
northern side  from the perpendicular pitch to these islands  a distance
of more than one hundred yards  the water glides down a sloping rock
with a velocity almost equal to that of its fall  above this fall the
river bends suddenly to the northward  while viewing this place captain
lewis heard a loud roar above him  and crossing the point of a hill for
a few hundred yards  he saw one of the most beautiful objects in nature 
the whole missouri is suddenly stopped by one shelving rock  which
without a single niche and with an edge as straight and regular as if
formed by art  stretches itself from one side of the river to the other
for at least a quarter of a mile  over this it precipitates itself in an
even uninterrupted sheet to the perpendicular depth of fifty feet 
whence dashing against the rocky bottom it rushes rapidly down  leaving
behind it a spray of the purest foam across the river  the scene which
it presented was indeed singularly beautiful  since without any of the
wild irregular sublimity of the lower falls  it combined all the regular
elegances which the fancy of a painter would select to form a beautiful
waterfall  the eye had scarcely been regaled with this charming
prospect  when at the distance of half a mile captain lewis observed
another of a similar kind  to this he immediately hastened  and found a
cascade stretching across the whole river for a quarter of a mile with a
descent of fourteen feet  though the perpendicular pitch was only six
feet  this too in any other neighborhood would have been an object of
great magnificence  but after what he had just seen it became of
secondary interest  his curiosity being however awakened  he determined
to go on even should night overtake him to the head of the falls  he
therefore pursued the southwest course of the river  which was one
constant succession of rapids and small cascades  at every one of which
the bluffs grew lower  or the bed of the river became more on a level
with the plains  at the distance of two and a half miles he arrived at
another cataract of twenty six feet  the river is here six hundred
yards wide  but the descent is not immediately perpendicular  though the
river falls generally with a regular and smooth sheet  for about one
third of the descent a rock protrudes to a small distance  receives the
water in its passage and gives it a curve  on the south side is a
beautiful plain a few feet above the level of the falls  on the north
the country is more broken  and there is a hill not far from the river 
just below the falls is a little island in the middle of the river well
covered with timber  here on a cottonwood tree an eagle had fixed its
nest  and seemed the undisputed mistress of a spot  to contest whose
dominion neither man nor beast would venture across the gulfs that
surround it  and which is further secured by the mist rising from the
falls  this solitary bird could not escape the observation of the
indians who made the eagle s nest a part of their description of the
falls  which now proves to be correct in almost every particular  except
that they did not do justice to their height  just above this is a
cascade of about five feet  beyond which  as far as could be discerned 
the velocity of the water seemed to abate  captain lewis now ascended
the hill which was behind him  and saw from its top a delightful plain
extending from the river to the base of the snow mountains to the south
and southwest  along this wide level country the missouri pursued its
winding course  filled with water to its even and grassy banks  while
about four miles above it was joined by a large river flowing from the
northwest through a valley three miles in width  and distinguished by
the timber which adorned its shores  the missouri itself stretches to
the south in one unruffled stream of water as if unconscious of the
roughness it must soon encounter  and bearing on its bosom vast flocks
of geese  while numerous herds of buffaloe are feeding on the plains
which surround it 

captain lewis then descended the hill  and directed his course towards
the river falling in from the west  he soon met a herd of at least a
thousand buffaloe  and being desirous of providing for supper shot one
of them  the animal began to bleed  and captain lewis who had forgotten
to reload his rifle  was intently watching to see him fall  when he
beheld a large brown bear who was stealing on him unperceived  and was
already within twenty steps  in the first moment of surprise he lifted
his rifle  but remembering instantly that it was not charged  and that
he had not time to reload  he felt that there was no safety but in
flight  it was in the open level plain  not a bush nor a tree within
three hundred yards  the bank of the river sloping and not more than
three feet high  so that there was no possible mode of concealment 
captain lewis therefore thought of retreating in a quick walk as fast as
the bear advanced towards the nearest tree  but as soon as he turned the
bear ran open mouth and at full speed upon him  captain lewis ran about
eighty yards  but finding that the animal gained on him fast  it flashed
on his mind that by getting into the water to such a depth that the bear
would be obliged to attack him swimming  there was still some chance of
his life  he therefore turned short  plunged into the river about waist
deep  and facing about presented the point of his espontoon  the bear
arrived at the water s edge within twenty feet of him  but as soon as he
put himself in this position of defence  he seemed frightened  and
wheeling about  retreated with as much precipitation as he had pursued 
very glad to be released from this danger  captain lewis returned to the
shore  and observed him run with great speed  sometimes looking back as
if he expected to be pursued  till he reached the woods  he could not
conceive the cause of the sudden alarm of the bear  but congratulated
himself on his escape when he saw his own track torn to pieces by the
furious animal  and learnt from the whole adventure never to suffer his
rifle to be a moment unloaded  he now resumed his progress in the
direction which the bear had taken towards the western river  and found
it a handsome stream about two hundred yards wide  apparently deep 
with a gentle current  its waters clear  and its banks  which were
formed principally of dark brown and blue clay  are about the same
height as those of the missouri  that is from three to five feet  what
was singular was that the river does not seem to overflow its banks at
any season  while it might be presumed from its vicinity to the
mountains  that the torrents arising from the melting of the snows 
would sometimes cause it to swell beyond its limits  the contrary fact
would induce a belief that the rocky mountains yield their snows very
reluctantly and equably to the sun  and are not often drenched by very
heavy rains  this river is no doubt that which the indians call medicine
river  which they mentioned as emptying into the missouri  just above
the falls  after examining medicine river  captain lewis set out at half
after six o clock in the evening on his return towards the camp  which
he estimated at the distance of twelve miles  in going through the low
grounds on medicine river he met an animal which at a distance he
thought was a wolf  but on coming within sixty paces  it proved to be
some brownish yellow animal standing near its burrow  which  when he
came nigh  crouched and seemed as if about to spring on him  captain
lewis fired and the beast disappeared in its burrow  from the track and
the general appearance of the animal he supposed it to be of the tiger
kind  he then went on  but as if the beasts of the forests had conspired
against him  three buffaloe bulls which were feeding with a large herd
at the distance of half a mile  left their companions and ran at full
speed towards him  he turned round  and unwilling to give up the field
advanced towards them  when they came within a hundred yards  they
stopped  looked at him for some time  and then retreated as they came 
he now pursued his route in the dark  reflecting on the strange
adventures and sights of the day which crowded on his mind so rapidly
that he should have been inclined to believe it all enchantment if the
thorns of the prickly pear piercing his feet did not dispel at every
moment the illusion  he at last reached the party  who had been very
anxious for his safety  and who had already decided on the route which
each should take in the morning to look for him  being much fatigued he
supped and slept well during the night 

saturday  15  the men were again sent out to bring in the game killed
yesterday and to procure more  they also obtained a number of fine trout
and several small catfish weighing about four pounds  and differing from
the white catfish lower down the missouri  on awaking this morning
captain lewis found a large rattlesnake coiled on the trunk of a tree
under which he had been sleeping  he killed it  and found it like those
we had seen before  differing from those of the atlantic states  not in
its colours but in the form and arrangement of them  it had one hundred
and seventy six scuta on the abdomen  and seventeen half formed scuta on
the tail  there is a heavy dew on the grass about the camp every
morning  which no doubt proceeds from the mist of the falls  as it takes
place no where in the plains nor on the river except here  the messenger
sent to captain clarke returned with information of his having arrived
five miles below at a rapid  which he did not think it prudent to ascend
and would wait till captain lewis and his party rejoined him 

on tuesday 11th  the day when captain lewis left us  we remained at the
entrance of maria s river and completed the deposits of all the articles
with which we could dispense  the morning had been fair with a high wind
from the southwest  which shifted in the evening to northwest  when the
weather became cold and the wind high  the next morning 

wednesday  12  we left our encampment with a fair day and a southwest
wind  the river was now so crowded with islands that within the distance
of ten miles and a half we passed eleven of different dimensions before
reaching a high black bluff in a bend on the left  where we saw a great
number of swallows  within one mile and a half farther we passed four
small islands  two on each side  and at fifteen miles from our
encampment reached a spring which the men called grog spring  it is on
the northern shore  and at the point where tansy river approaches within
one hundred yards of the missouri  from this place we proceeded three
miles to a low bluff on the north opposite to an island  and spent the
night in an old indian encampment  the bluffs under which we passed were
composed of a blackish clay and coal for about eighty feet  above which
for thirty or forty feet is a brownish yellow earth  the river is very
rapid and obstructed by bars of gravel and stone of different shapes and
sizes  so that three of our canoes were in great danger in the course of
the day  we had a few drops of rain about two o clock in the afternoon 
the only animals we killed were elk and deer  but we saw great numbers
of rattlesnakes 

thursday  13  the morning was fair and there was some dew on the ground 
after passing two islands we reached at the distance of a mile and a
half a small rapid stream fifty yards wide  emptying itself on the
south  rising in a mountain to the southeast about twelve or fifteen
miles distant  and at this time covered with snow  as it is the channel
for the melted snow of that mountain we called it snow river  opposite
to its entrance is another island  at one mile and three quarters is a
black bluff of slate on the south  nine miles beyond which  after
passing ten islands  we came to on the southern shore near an old indian
fortified camp  opposite the lower point of an island  having made
thirteen miles  the number of islands and shoals  the rapidity of the
river  and the quantity of large stones  rendered the navigation very
disagreeable  along the banks we distinguished several low bluffs or
cliffs of slate  there were great numbers of geese and goslings  the
geese not being able to fly at this season  gooseberries are ripe and in
great abundance  the yellow currant is also common  but not yet ripe 
our game consisted of buffaloe and goats 

friday  14  again the day is fine  we made two miles to a small island
in the southern bend  after passing several bad rapids  the current
becomes indeed swifter as we ascend and the canoes frequently receive
water as we drag them with difficulty along  at the distance of six
miles we reached captain clarke s camp on the fourth  which is on the
north side and opposite to a large gravelly bar  here the man sent by
captain lewis joined us with the pleasing intelligence that he had
discovered the falls  and was convinced that the course we were pursuing
was that of the true missouri  at a mile and a half we reached the upper
point of an island  three quarters of a mile beyond which we encamped on
the south  after making only ten and a quarter miles  along the river
was but little timber  but much hard slate in the bluffs 

saturday  15  the morning being warm and fair we set out at the usual
hour  but proceeded with great difficulty in consequence of the
increased rapidity of the current  the channel is constantly obstructed
by rocks and dangerous rapids  during the whole progress the men are in
the water hauling the canoes  and walking on sharp rocks and round
stones which cut their feet or cause them to fall  the rattlesnakes too
are so numerous that the men are constantly on their guard against being
bitten by them  yet they bear the fatigues with the most undiminished
cheerfulness  we hear the roar of the falls very distinctly this
morning  at three and three quarter miles we came to a rock in a bend to
the south  resembling a tower  at six and three quarter miles we reached
a large creek on the south  which after one of our men we called
shield s creek  it is rapid in its course  about thirty yards wide  and
on sending a person five miles up it proved to have a fall of fifteen
feet  and some timber on its low ground  above this river the bluffs of
the missouri are of red earth mixed with stratas of black stone  below
it we passed some white clay in the banks which mixes with water in
every respect like flour  at three and three quarter miles we reached a
point on the north opposite an island and a bluff  and one mile and a
quarter further  after passing some red bluffs  came to on the north
side  having made twelve miles  here we found a rapid so difficult that
we did not think proper to attempt the passage this evening  and
therefore sent to captain lewis to apprise him of our arrival  we saw a
number of geese  ducks  crows  and blackbirds to day  the two former
with their young  the river rose a little this evening  but the timber
is still so scarce that we could not procure enough for our use during
the night 

sunday  june 16  some rain fell last night  and this morning the weather
was cloudy and the wind high from the southwest  we passed the rapid by
doubly manning the periogue and canoes  and halted at the distance of a
mile and a quarter to examine the rapids above  which we found to be a
continued succession of cascades as far as the view extended  which was
about two miles  about a mile above where we halted was a large creek
falling in on the south  opposite to which is a large sulphur spring
falling over the rocks on the north  captain lewis arrived at two from
the falls about five miles above us  and after consulting upon the
subject of the portage  we crossed the river and formed a camp on the
north  having come three quarters of a mile to day  from our own
observation we had deemed the south side to be the most favourable for a
portage  but two men sent out for the purpose of examining it  reported
that the creek and the ravines intersected the plain so deeply that it
was impossible to cross it  captain clarke therefore resolved to examine
more minutely what was the best route  the four canoes were unloaded at
the camp and then sent across the river  where by means of strong cords
they were hauled over the first rapid  whence they may be easily drawn
into the creek  finding too  that the portage would be at all events too
long to enable us to carry the boats on our shoulders  six men were set
to work to make wheels for carriages to transport them  since leaving
maria s river the wife of chaboneau  our interpreter  has been
dangerously ill  but she now found great relief from the mineral water
of the sulphur spring  it is situated about two hundred yards from the
missouri  into which it empties over a precipice of rock about
twenty five feet high  the water is perfectly transparent  strongly
impregnated with sulphur  and we suspect iron also  as the colour of the
hills and bluffs in the neighbourhood indicates the presence of that
metal  in short the water to all appearance is precisely similar to that
of bowyer s sulphur spring in virginia 

monday 17  captain clarke set out with five men to explore the country 
the rest were employed in hunting  making wheels and in drawing the five
canoes and all the baggage up the creek  which we now called portage
creek  from this creek there is a gradual ascent to the top of the high
plain  while the bluffs of the creek lower down and of the missouri 
both above and below its entrance  were so steep as to have rendered it
almost impracticable to drag them up from the missouri  we found great
difficulty and some danger in even ascending the creek thus far  in
consequence of the rapids and rocks of the channel of the creek  which
just above where we brought the canoes has a fall of five feet  and high
and sleep bluffs beyond it  we were very fortunate in finding just below
portage creek a cottonwood tree about twenty two inches in diameter  and
large enough to make the carriage wheels  it was perhaps the only one of
the same size within twenty miles  and the cottonwood  which we are
obliged to employ in the other parts of the work  is extremely soft and
brittle  the mast of the white periogue which we mean to leave behind 
supplied us with two axletrees  there are vast quantities of buffaloe
feeding in the plains or watering in the river  which is also strewed
with the floating carcases and limbs of these animals  they go in large
herds to water about the falls  and as all the passages to the river
near that place are narrow and steep  the foremost are pressed into the
river by the impatience of those behind  in this way we have seen ten or
a dozen disappear over the falls in a few minutes  they afford excellent
food for the wolves  bears  and birds of prey  and this circumstance may
account for the reluctance of the bears to yield their dominion over the
neighbourhood 

tuesday 18  the periogue was drawn up a little below our camp and
secured in a thick copse of willow bushes  we now began to form a cache
or place of deposit and to dry our goods and other articles which
required inspection  the wagons too are completed  our hunters brought
us ten deer  and we shot two out of a herd of buffaloe that came to
water at the sulphur spring  there is a species of gooseberry growing
abundantly among the rocks on the sides of the cliffs  it is now ripe 
of a pale red colour  about the size of the common gooseberry  and like
it is an ovate pericarp of soft pulp enveloping a number of small
whitish coloured seeds  and consisting of a yellowish slimy mucilaginous
substance  with a sweet taste  the surface of the berry is covered with
a glutinous adhesive matter  and its fruit though ripe retains its
withered corolla  the shrub itself seldom rises more than two feet high 
is much branched  and has no thorns  the leaves resemble those of the
common gooseberry except in being smaller  and the berry is supported by
separate peduncles or footstalks half an inch long  there are also
immense quantities of grasshoppers of a brown colour in the plains  and
they no doubt contribute to the lowness of the grass  which is not
generally more than three inches high  though it is soft  narrow leafed
and affords a fine pasture for the buffaloe 

wednesday 19  the wind blew violently to day  as it did yesterday  and
as it does frequently in this open country  where there is not a tree to
break or oppose its force  some men were sent for the meat killed
yesterday which fortunately had not been discovered by the wolves 
another party went to medicine river in quest of elk  which we hope may
be induced to resort there  from there being more wood in that
neighborhood than on the missouri  all the rest were occupied in packing
the baggage and mending their moccasins  in order to prepare for the
portage  we caught a number of the white fish  but no catfish or trout 
our poor indian woman  who had recovered so far as to walk out 
imprudently ate a quantity of the white apple  which with some dried
fish occasioned a return of her fever 

the meridian altitude of the sun s lower limb  as observed with octant
by back observation  was 53 degrees 15   giving as the latitude of our
camp  47 degrees 8  59  5   

thursday 20  as we were desirous of getting meat enough to last us
during the portage  so that the men might not be diverted from their
labour to look for food  we sent out four hunters to day  they killed
eleven buffaloe  this was indeed an easy labour  for there are vast
herds coming constantly to the opposite bank of the river to water  they
seem also to make much use of the mineral water of the sulphur spring 
but whether from choice  or because it is more convenient than the
river  we cannot determine  as they sometimes pass near the spring and
go on to the river  besides this spring  brackish water or that of a
dark colour impregnated with mineral salts  such as we have frequently
met on the missouri  may be found in small quantities in some of the
steep ravines on the north side of the river opposite to us and at the
falls 

captain clarke returned this evening  having examined the whole course
of the river and fixed the route most practicable for the portage  the
first day  17th  he was occupied in measuring the heights and distances
along the banks of the river  and slept near a ravine at the foot of the
crooked falls  having very narrowly escaped falling into the river 
where he would have perished inevitably  in descending the cliffs near
the grand cataract  the next day  18th  he continued the same occupation
and arrived in the afternoon at the junction of medicine and missouri
rivers  up the latter he ascended  and passed at the distance of a mile
an island and a little timber in an eastwardly bend of the river  one
mile beyond this he came to the lower point of a large island  another
small island in the middle of the river  and one near the left shore at
the distance of three miles  opposite to the head of which he encamped
near the mouth of a creek which appeared to rise in the south mountain 
these three islands are opposite to each other  and we gave them the
name of the whitebear islands from observing some of those animals on
them  he killed a beaver  an elk and eight buffaloe  one of the men who
was sent a short distance from the camp to bring home some meat  was
attacked by a white bear  and closely pursued within forty paces of the
camp  and narrowly escaped being caught  captain clarke immediately went
with three men in quest of the bear  which he was afraid might surprise
another of the hunters who was out collecting the game  the bear was
however too quick  for before captain clarke could reach the man  the
bear had attacked him and compelled him to take refuge in the water  he
now ran off as they approached  and it being late they deferred pursuing
him till the next morning 




                                chapter xi 

     description and romantic appearance of the missouri at the junction
     of the medicine river  the difficulty of transporting the baggage
     at the falls  the party employed in the construction of a boat of
     skins  the embarrassments they had to encounter for want of proper
     materials  during the work the party much troubled by white
     bears  violent hail storm  and providential escape of captain
     clarke and his party  description of a remarkable
     fountain  singular explosion heard from the black mountains  the
     boat found to be insufficient  and the serious disappointment of
     the party  captain clarke undertakes to repair the damage by
     building canoes  and accomplishes the task 


on the 19th  captain clarke not being able to find the bear mentioned in
the last chapter  spent the day in examining the country both above and
below the whitebear islands  and concluded that the place of his
encampment would be the best point for the extremity of the portage  the
men were therefore occupied in drying the meat to be left here  immense
numbers of buffaloe are every where round  and they saw a summer duck
which is now sitting  the next morning  20th  he crossed the level
plain  fixed stakes to mark the route of the portage  till he passed a
large ravine which would oblige us to make the portage farther from the
river  after this there being no other obstacle he went to the river
where he had first struck it  and took its courses and distances down to
the camp  from the draught and survey of captain clarke  we had now a
clear and connected view of the falls  cascades  and rapids of the
missouri 

this river is three hundred yards wide at the point where it receives
the waters of medicine river  which is one hundred and thirty seven
yards in width  the united current continues three hundred and
twenty eight poles to a small rapid on the north side  from which it
gradually widens to one thousand four hundred yards  and at the distance
of five hundred and forty eight poles reaches the head of the rapids 
narrowing as it approaches them  here the hills on the north which had
withdrawn from the bank closely border the river  which  for the space
of three hundred and twenty poles  makes its way over the rocks with a
descent of thirty feet  in this course the current is contracted to five
hundred and eighty yards  and after throwing itself over a small pitch
of five feet  forms a beautiful cascade of twenty six feet five inches 
this does not however fall immediately perpendicular  being stopped by a
part of the rock which projects at about one third of the distance 
after descending this fall  and passing the cottonwood island on which
the eagle has fixed its nest  the river goes on for five hundred and
thirty two poles over rapids and little falls  the estimated descent of
which is thirteen feet six inches till it is joined by a large fountain
boiling up underneath the rocks near the edge of the river  into which
it falls with a cascade of eight feet  it is of the most perfect
clearness and rather of a bluish cast  and even after falling into the
missouri it preserves its colour for half a mile  from this fountain the
river descends with increased rapidity for the distance of two hundred
and fourteen poles  during which the estimated descent is five feet from
this for a distance of one hundred and thirty five poles  the river
descends fourteen feet seven inches including a perpendicular fall of
six feet seven inches  the river has now become pressed into a space of
four hundred and seventy three yards  and here forms a grand cataract by
falling over a plain rock the whole distance across the river to the
depth of forty seven feet eight inches  after recovering itself the
missouri then proceeds with an estimated descent of three feet  till at
the distance of one hundred and two poles it again is precipitated down
the crooked falls of nineteen feet perpendicular  below this at the
mouth of a deep ravine is a fall of five feet  after which for the
distance of nine hundred and seventy poles the descent is much more
gradual  not being more than ten feet  and then succeeds a handsome
level plain for the space of one hundred and seventy eight poles with a
computed descent of three feet  making a bend towards the north  thence
it descends during four hundred and eight poles  about eighteen feet and
a half  when it makes a perpendicular fall of two feet  which is ninety
poles beyond the great cataract  in approaching which it descends
thirteen feet within two hundred yards  and gathering strength from its
confined channel  which is only two hundred and eighty yards wide 
rushes over the fall to the depth of eighty seven feet and three
quarters of an inch  after raging among the rocks and losing itself in
foam  it is compressed immediately into a bed of ninety three yards in
width  it continues for three hundred and forty poles to the entrance of
a run or deep ravine where there is a fall of three feet  which  joined
to the decline of the river during that course  makes the descent six
feet  as it goes on the descent within the next two hundred and forty
poles is only four feet  from this passing a run or deep ravine the
descent for four hundred poles is thirteen feet  within two hundred and
forty poles a second descent of eighteen feet  thence one hundred and
sixty poles a descent of six feet  after which to the mouth of portage
creek  a distance of two hundred and eighty poles  the descent is ten
feet  from this survey and estimate it results that the river
experiences a descent of three hundred and fifty two feet in the course
of two and three quarter miles  from the commencement of the rapids to
the mouth of portage creek  exclusive of the almost impassable rapids
which extend for a mile below its entrance 

the latitude of our camp below the entrance of portage creek  was found
to be 47 degrees 7  10  3  as deduced from a meridian altitude of the
sun s lower limb taken with octant by back observation giving 53 degrees
10  

friday  june 21  having made the necessary preparations for continuing
our route  a part of the baggage was carried across the creek into the
high plain  three miles in advance and placed on one of the carriages
with truck wheels  the rest of the party was employed in drying meat and
dressing elk skins  we killed several muledeer and an elk  and observed
as usual vast quantities of buffaloe who came to drink at the river  for
the first time on the missouri we have seen near the falls a species of
fishing duck  the body of which is brown and white  the wings white  and
the head and upper part of the neck of a brick red  with a narrow beak 
which seems to be of the same kind common in the susquehanna  potomac
and james  river  the little wood which this neighbourhood affords
consists of the broad and narrow leafed cottonwood  the box alder  the
narrow and broad leafed willow  the large or sweet willow  which was not
common below maria s river  but which here attains the same size and has
the same appearance as in the atlantic states  the undergrowth consists
of roses  gooseberries  currants  small honeysuckles  and the redwood 
the inner part of which the  engages  or watermen are fond of smoking
when mixed with tobacco 

saturday  22  we now set out to pass the portage and halted for dinner
at eight miles distance near a little stream  the axletrees of our
carriage  which had been made of an old mast  and the cottonwood tongues
broke before we came there  but we renewed them with the timber of the
sweet willow  which lasted till within half a mile of our intended camp 
when the tongues gave way and we were obliged to take as much baggage as
we could carry on our backs down to the river  where we formed an
encampment in a small grove of timber opposite to the whitebear islands 
here the banks on both sides of the river are handsome  level  and
extensive  that near our camp is not more than two feet above the
surface of the water  the river is about eight hundred yards wide just
above these islands  ten feet deep in most places  and with a very
gentle current  the plains however on this part of the river are not so
fertile as those from the mouth of the muscleshell and thence downwards 
there is much more stone on the sides of the hills and on the broken
lands than is to be found lower down  we saw in the plains vast
quantities of buffaloe  a number of small birds  and the large brown
curlew  which is now sitting  and lays its eggs  which are of a pale
blue with black specks  on the ground without any nest  there is also a
species of lark much resembling the bird called the oldfield lark  with
a yellow breast and a black spot on the croup  though it differs from
the latter in having its tail formed of feathers of an unequal length
and pointed  the beak too is somewhat longer and more curved  and the
note differs considerably  the prickly pear annoyed us very much to day
by sticking through our moccasins  as soon as we had kindled our fires
we examined the meat which captain clarke had left here  but found that
the greater part of it had been taken by the wolves 

sunday  23  after we had brought up the canoe and baggage captain clarke
went down to the camp at portage creek  where four of the men had been
left with the indian woman  captain lewis during the morning prepared
the camp  and in the afternoon went down in a canoe to medicine river to
look after the three men who had been sent thither to hunt on the 19th 
and from whom nothing had as yet been heard  he went up the river about
half a mile and then walked along on the right bank  hallooing as he
went  till at the distance of five miles he found one of them who had
fixed his camp on the opposite bank  where he had killed seven deer and
dried about six hundred pounds of buffaloe meat  but had killed no elk 
the animal chiefly wanted  he knew nothing of his companions except that
on the day of their departure from camp he had left them at the falls
and come on to medicine river  not having seen them since  as it was too
late to return captain lewis passed over on a raft which he made for
the purpose and spent the night at shannon s camp  and the next morning 

monday  24  sent j  fields up the river with orders to go four miles and
return  whether he found the two absent hunters or not  then descending
the southwest side of medicine river  he crossed the missouri in the
canoe  and sent shannon back to his camp to join fields and bring the
meat which they had killed  this they did  and arrived in the evening at
the camp on whitebear islands  a part of the men from portage creek also
arrived with two canoes and baggage  on going down yesterday captain
clarke cut off several angles of the former route so as to shorten the
portage considerably  and marked it with stakes  he arrived there in
time to have two of the canoes carried up in the high plain about a mile
in advance  here they all repaired their moccasins  and put on double
soals to protect them from the prickly pear and from the sharp points of
earth which have been formed by the trampling of the buffaloe during the
late rains  this of itself is sufficient to render the portage
disagreeable to one who had no burden  but as the men are loaded as
heavily as their strength will permit  the crossing is really painful 
some are limping with the soreness of their feet  others are scarcely
able to stand for more than a few minutes from the heat and fatigue 
they are all obliged to halt and rest frequently  and at almost every
stopping place they fall and many of them are asleep in an instant  yet
no one complains and they go on with great cheerfulness  at their camp
drewyer and fields joined them  and while captain lewis was looking for
them at medicine river  they returned to report the absence of shannon
about whom they had been very uneasy  they had killed several buffaloe
at the bend of the missouri above the falls  and dried about eight
hundred pounds of meat and got one hundred pounds of tallow  they had
also killed some deer  but had seen no elk  after getting the party in
motion with the canoes captain clarke returned to his camp at portage
creek 

we were now occupied in fitting up a boat of skins  the frame of which
had been prepared for the purpose at harper s ferry  it was made of
iron  thirty six feet long  four feet and a half in the beam  and
twenty six inches wide in the bottom  two men had been sent this morning
for timber to complete it  but they could find scarcely any even
tolerably straight sticks four and a half feet long  and as the
cottonwood is too soft and brittle we were obliged to use the willow and
box alder 

tuesday  25  the party returned to the lower camp  two men were sent on
the large island to look for timber  j  fields was sent up the missouri
to hunt elk  but he returned about noon and informed us that a few miles
above he saw two white bear near the river  and in attempting to fire at
them came suddenly on a third  who being only a few steps off
immediately attacked him  that in running to escape from the monster he
leaped down a steep bank of the river  where falling on a bar of stone
he cut his hand and knee and bent his gun  but fortunately for him the
bank concealed him from his antagonist or he would have been most
probably lost  the other two returned with a small quantity of bark and
timber  which was all they could find on the island  but they had killed
two elk  these were valuable  as we are desirous of procuring the skins
of that animal in order to cover the boat  as they are more strong and
durable than those of the buffaloe  and do not shrink so much in drying 
the party that went to the lower camp had one canoe and the baggage
carried into the high plain to be ready in the morning  and then all who
could make use of their feet had a dance on the green to the music of a
violin  we have been unsuccessful in our attempt to catch fish  nor does
there seem to be any in this part of the river  we observe a number of
water terrapins  there are quantities of young blackbirds in these
islands just beginning to fly  among the vegetable productions we
observe a species of wild rye which is now heading  it rises to the
height of eighteen or twenty inches  the beard remarkably fine and soft 
the culen is jointed  and in every respect except in height it resembles
the wild rye  great quantities of mint too  like the peppermint  are
found here 

the winds are sometimes violent in these plains  the men inform us that
as they were bringing one of the canoes along on truck wheels  they
hoisted the sail and the wind carried her along for some distance 

wednesday 26  two men were sent on the opposite side of the river for
bark and timber  of which they procured some  but by no means enough
for our purposes  the bark of the cottonwood is too soft  and our only
dependence is on the sweet willow  which has a tough strong bark  the
two hunters killed seven buffaloe  a party arrived from below with two
canoes and baggage  and the wind being from the southeast  they had made
considerable progress with the sails  on their arrival one of the men
who had been considerably heated and fatigued  swallowed a very hearty
draught of water  and was immediately taken ill  captain lewis bled him
with a penknife  having no other instrument at hand  and succeeded in
restoring him to health the next day  captain clarke formed a second
cache or deposit near the camp  and placed the swivel under the rocks
near the river  the antelopes are still scattered through the plains 
the females with their young  which are generally two in number  and the
males by themselves 

thursday 27  the party were employed in preparing timber for the boat 
except two who were sent to hunt  about one in the afternoon a cloud
arose from the southwest and brought with it violent thunder  lightning 
and hail  soon after it passed the hunters came in from about four miles
above us  they had killed nine elk  and three bear  as they were hunting
on the river they saw a low ground covered with thick brushwood  where
from the tracks along shore they thought a bear had probably taken
refuge  they therefore landed  without making a noise  and climbed
a tree about twenty feet above the ground  having fixed themselves
securely  they raised a loud shout  and a bear instantly rushed towards
them  these animals never climb  and therefore when he came to the tree
and stopped to look at them  drewyer shot him in the head  he proved to
be the largest we have yet seen  his nose appeared to be like that of a
common ox  his fore feet measured nine inches across  and the hind feet
were seven inches wide  and eleven and three quarters long  exclusive of
the talons  one of these animals came within thirty yards of the camp
last night  and carried off some buffaloe meat which we had placed on
a pole  in the evening after the storm the water on this side of the
river became of a deep crimson colour  probably caused by some stream
above washing down a kind of soft red stone  which we observed in the
neighbouring bluffs and gullies  at the camp below  the men who left us
in the morning were busy in preparing their load for to morrow  which
were impeded by the rain  hail  and the hard wind from the northwest 

friday 28  the party all occupied in making the boat  they obtained a
sufficient quantity of willow bark to line her  and over these were
placed the elk skins  and when they failed we were obliged to use the
buffaloe hide  the white bear have now become exceedingly troublesome 
they constantly infest our camp during the night  and though they have
not attacked us  as our dog who patroles all night gives us notice of
their approach  yet we are obliged to sleep with our arms by our sides
for fear of accident  and we cannot send one man alone to any distance 
particularly if he has to pass through brushwood  we saw two of them
to day on the large island opposite to us  but as we are all so much
occupied now  we mean to reserve ourselves for some leisure moment  and
then make a party to drive them from the islands  the river has risen
nine inches since our arrival here 

at portage creek captain clarke completed the cache  in which we
deposited whatever we could spare from our baggage  some ammunition 
provisions  books  the specimens of plants and minerals  and a draught
of the river from its entrance to fort mandan  after closing it he broke
up the encampment  and took on all the remaining baggage to the high
plain  about three miles  portage creek has risen considerably in
consequence of the rain  and the water had become of a deep crimson
colour  and ill tasted  on overtaking the canoe he found that there was
more baggage than could be carried on the two carriages  and therefore
left some of the heavy articles which could not be injured  and
proceeded on to willowrun where he encamped for the night  here they
made a supper on two buffaloe which they killed on the way  but passed
the night in the rain  with a high wind from the southwest  in the
morning 

saturday 29  finding it impossible to reach the end of the portage with
their present load  in consequence of the state of the road after the
rain  he sent back nearly all his party to bring on the articles which
had been left yesterday  having lost some notes and remarks which he had
made on first ascending the river  he determined to go up to the
whitebear islands along its banks  in order to supply the deficiency  he
there left one man to guard the baggage  and went on to the falls
accompanied by his servant york  chaboneau and his wife with her young
child  on his arrival there he observed a very dark cloud rising in the
west which threatened rain  and looked around for some shelter  but
could find no place where they would be secure from being blown into the
river if the wind should prove as violent as it sometimes does in the
plains  at length about a quarter of a mile above the falls he found a
deep ravine where there were some shelving rocks  under which he took
refuge  they were on the upper side of the ravine near the river 
perfectly safe from the rain  and therefore laid down their guns 
compass  and other articles which they carried with them  the shower
was at first moderate  it then increased to a heavy rain  the effects of
which they did not feel  soon after a torrent of rain and hail
descended  the rain seemed to fall in a solid mass  and instantly
collecting in the ravine came rolling down in a dreadful current 
carrying the mud and rocks  and every thing that opposed it  captain
clarke fortunately saw it a moment before it reached them  and springing
up with his gun and shotpouch in his left hand  with his right clambered
up the steep bluff  pushing on the indian woman with her child in her
arms  her husband too had seized her hand and was pulling her up the
hill  but he was so terrified at the danger that but for captain clark 
himself and his wife and child would have been lost  so instantaneous
was the rise of the water  that before captain clark had reached his gun
and began to ascend the bank  the water was up to his waist  and he
could scarce get up faster than it rose  till it reached the height of
fifteen feet with a furious current  which had they waited a moment
longer would have swept them into the river just above the great falls 
down which they must inevitable have been precipitated  they reached the
plain in safety  and found york who had separated from them just before
the storm to hunt some buffaloe  and was now returning to find his
master  they had been obliged to escape so rapidly that captain clarke
lost his compass and umbrella  chaboneau left his gun  shotpouch  and
tomahawk  and the indian woman had just time to grasp her child  before
the net in which it lay at her feet was carried down the current  he now
relinquished his intention of going up the river and returned to the
camp at willowrun  here he found that the party sent this morning for
the baggage  had all returned to camp in great confusion  leaving their
loads in the plain  on account of the heat they generally go nearly
naked  and with no covering on their heads  the hail was so large and
driven so furiously against them by the high wind  that it knocked
several of them down  one of them particularly was thrown on the ground
three times  and most of them bleeding freely and complained of being
much bruised  willow run had risen six feet since the rain  and as the
plains were so wet that they could not proceed  they passed the night at
their camp 

at the whitebear camp also  we had not been insensible to the
hail storm  though less exposed  in the morning there had been a heavy
shower of rain  after which it became fair  after assigning to the men
their respective employments  captain lewis took one of them and went to
see the large fountain near the falls  for about six miles he passed
through a beautiful level plain  and then on reaching the break of the
river hills  was overtaken by the gust of wind from the southwest
attended by lightning  thunder  and rain  fearing a renewal of the scene
on the 27th  they took shelter in a little gully where there were some
broad stones with which they meant to protect themselves against the
hail  but fortunately there was not much  and that of a small size  so
that they felt no inconvenience except that of being exposed without
shelter for an hour  and being drenched by the rain  after it was over
they proceeded to the fountain which is perhaps the largest in america 
it is situated in a pleasant level plain  about twenty five yards from
the river  into which it falls over some steep irregular rocks with a
sudden ascent of about six feet in one part of its course  the water
boils up from among the rocks and with such force near the centre  that
the surface seems higher there than the earth on the sides of the
fountain  which is a handsome turf of fine green grass  the water is
extremely pure  cold and pleasant to the taste  not being impregnated
with lime or any foreign substance  it is perfectly transparent and
continues its bluish cast for half a mile down the missouri 
notwithstanding the rapidity of the river  after examining it for some
time captain lewis returned to the camp 

sunday 30  in the morning captain clarke sent the men to bring up the
baggage left in the plains yesterday  on their return the axletrees and
carriages were repaired  and the baggage  conveyed on the shoulders of
the party across willow run which had fallen as low as three feet  the
carriages being then taken over  a load of baggage was carried to the
six mile stake  deposited there  and the carriages brought back  such is
the state of the plains that this operation consumed the day  two men
were sent to the falls to look for the articles lost yesterday  but they
found nothing but the compass covered with mud and sand at the mouth of
the ravine  the place at which captain clarke had been caught by the
storm  was filled with large rocks  the men complain much of the bruises
received yesterday from the hail  a more than usual number of buffaloe
appeared about the camp to day  and furnished plenty of meat  captain
clarke thought that at one view he must have seen at least ten thousand 
in the course of the day there was a heavy gust of wind from the
southwest  after which the evening was fair 

at the whitebear camp we had a heavy dew this morning  which is quite a
remarkable occurrence  the party continues to be occupied with the boat 
the crossbars for which are now finished  and there remain only the
strips to complete the wood work  the skins necessary to cover it have
already been prepared and they amount to twenty eight elk skins and four
buffaloe skins  among our game were two beaver  which we have had
occasion to observe always are found wherever there is timber  we also
killed a large bat or goatsucker of which there are many in this
neighbourhood  resembling in every respect those of the same species in
the united states  we have not seen the leather winged bat for some
time  nor are there any of the small goatsucker in this part of the
missouri  we have not seen either that species of goatsucker or
nighthawk called the whippoorwill  which is commonly confounded in the
united states with the large goatsucker which we observe here  this last
prepares no nest but lays its eggs in the open plains  they generally
begin to sit on two eggs  and we believe raise only one brood in a
season  at the present moment they are just hatching their young 

monday  july 1  after a severe day s work captain clarke reached our
camp in the evening  accompanied by his party and all the baggage except
that left at the six mile stake  for which they were too much fatigued
to return  the route from the lower camp on portage creek to that near
whitebear island  having been now measured and examined by captain
clarke was as follows 

from our camp opposite the last considerable rapid to the entrance of
portage creek south 9 degrees east for three quarters of a mile  thence
on a course south 10 degrees east for two miles  though for the canoes
the best route is to the left of this course  and strikes portage one
mile and three quarters from its entrance  avoiding in this way a very
steep hill which lies above portage creek  from this south 18 degrees
west for four miles  passing the head of a drain or ravine which falls
into the missouri below the great falls  and to the willow run which has
always a plentiful supply of good water and some timber  here the course
turns to south 45 degrees west for four miles further  then south 66
degrees west three miles  crossing at the beginning of the course the
head of a drain which falls into the missouri at the crooked falls  and
reaching an elevated point of the plain from which south 42 degrees
west  on approaching the river on this course there is a long and gentle
descent from the high plain  after which the road turns a little to the
right of the course up the river to our camp  the whole portage is
seventeen and three quarter miles 

at the whitebear camp we were occupied with the boat and digging a pit
for the purpose of making some tar  the day has been warm  and the
mosquitoes troublesome  we were fortunate enough to observe equal
altitudes of the sun with sextant  which since our arrival here we have
been prevented from doing  by flying clouds and storms in the evening 

tuesday  july 2d  a shower of rain fell very early this morning  we then
despatched some men for the baggage left behind yesterday  and the rest
were engaged in putting the boat together  this was accomplished in
about three hours  and then we began to sew on the leather over the
crossbars or iron on the inner side of the boat which form the ends of
the sections  by two o clock the last of the baggage arrived  to the
great delight of the party who were anxious to proceed  the mosquitoes
we find very troublesome 

having completed our celestial observations we went over to the large
island to make an attack upon its inhabitants the bears  who have
annoyed us very much of late  and who were prowling about our camp all
last night  we found that the part of the island frequented by the bear
forms an almost impenetrable thicket of the broad leafed willow  into
this we forced our way in parties of three  but could see only one bear 
who instantly attacked drewyer  fortunately as he was rushing on the
hunter shot him through the heart within twenty paces and he fell  which
enabled drewyer to get out of his way  we then followed him one hundred
yards and found that the wound had been mortal  not being able to
discover any more of these animals we returned to camp  here in turning
over some of the baggage we caught a rat somewhat larger than the common
european rat  and of a lighter colour  the body and outer parts of the
legs and head of a light lead colour  the inner side of the legs as well
as the belly  feet and ears are white  the ears are not covered with
hair  and are much larger than those of the common rat  the toes also
are longer  the eyes black and prominent  the whiskers very long and
full  the tail rather longer than the body  and covered with fine fur
and hair of the same size with that on the back  which is very close 
short  and silky in its texture  this was the first we had met  although
its nests are very frequent among the cliffs of rocks and hollow trees 
where we also found large quantities of the shells and seed of the
prickly pear  on which we conclude they chiefly subsist  the musquitoes
are uncommonly troublesome  the wind was again high from the southwest 
these winds are in fact always the coldest and most violent which we
experience  and the hypothesis which we have formed on that subject is 
that the air coming in contact with the snowy mountains immediately
becomes chilled and condensed  and being thus rendered heavier than the
air below it descends into the rarified air below or into the vacuum
formed by the constant action of the sun on the open unsheltered plains 
the clouds rise suddenly near these mountains and distribute their
contents partially over the neighbouring plains  the same cloud will
discharge hail alone in one part  hail and rain in another  and rain
only in a third  and all within the space of a few miles  while at the
same time there is snow falling on the mountains to the southeast of us 
there is at present no snow on those mountains  that which covered them
on our arrival as well as that which has since fallen having
disappeared  the mountains to the north and northwest of us are still
entirely covered with snow  and indeed there has been no perceptible
diminution of it since we first saw them  which induces a belief either
that the clouds prevailing at this season do not reach their summits or
that they deposit their snow only  they glisten with great beauty when
the sun shines on them in a particular direction  and most probably from
this glittering appearance have derived the name of the shining
mountains 

wednesday  3  nearly the whole party were employed in different labours
connected with the boat  which is now almost completed  but we have not
as yet been able to obtain tar from our kiln  a circumstance that will
occasion us not a little embarrassment  having been told by the indians
that on leaving the falls we should soon pass the buffaloe country  we
have before us the prospect of fasting occasionally  but in order to
provide a supply we sent out the hunters who killed only a buffaloe and
two antelopes  which added to six beaver and two otter have been all our
game for two or three days  at ten in the morning we had a light shower
which scarcely wet the grass 

thursday  july 4th  the boat was now completed except what is in fact
the most difficult part  the making her seams secure  we had intended to
despatch a canoe with part of our men to the united states early this
spring  but not having yet seen the snake indians  or knowing whether to
calculate on their friendship or enmity  we have decided not to weaken
our party which is already scarcely sufficient to repel any hostility 
we were afraid too that such a measure might dishearten those who
remain  and as we have never suggested it to them  they are all
perfectly and enthusiastically attached to the enterprise  and willing
to encounter any danger to ensure its success  we had a heavy dew this
morning 

since our arrival at the falls we have repeatedly heard a strange noise
coming from the mountains in a direction a little to the north of west 
it is heard at different periods of the day and night  sometimes when
the air is perfectly still and without a cloud  and consists of one
stroke only  or of five or six discharges in quick succession  it is
loud and resembles precisely the sound of a six pound piece of ordnance
at the distance of three miles  the minnetarees frequently mentioned
this noise like thunder  which they said the mountains made  but we had
paid no attention to it  believing it to have been some superstition or
perhaps a falsehood  the watermen also of the party say that the pawnees
and ricaras give the same account of a noise heard in the black
mountains to the westward of them  the solution of the mystery given by
the philosophy of the watermen is  that it is occasioned by the
bursting of the rich mines of silver confined within the bosom of the
mountain  an elk and a beaver are all that were killed to day  the
buffaloe seemed to have withdrawn from our neighbourhood  though several
of the men who went to day to visit the falls for the first time 
mention that they are still abundant at that place  we contrived however
to spread not a very sumptuous but a comfortable table in honour of the
day  and in the evening gave the men a drink of spirits  which was the
last of our stock  some of them appeared sensible to the effects of even
so small a quantity  and as is usual among them on all festivals  the
fiddle was produced and a dance begun  which lasted till nine o clock 
when it was interrupted by a heavy shower of rain  they continued
however their merriment till a late hour 

friday 5  the boat was brought up into a high situation and fires
kindled under her in order to dry her more expeditiously  despairing now
of procuring any tar  we formed a composition of pounded charcoal with
beeswax and buffaloe tallow to supply its place  should this resource
fail us it will be very unfortunate  as in every other respect the boat
answers our purposes completely  although not quite dry she can be
carried with ease by five men  her form is as complete as could be
wished  very strong  and will carry at least eight thousand pounds with
her complement of hands  besides our want of tar  we have been unlucky
in sewing the skins with a needle which had sharp edges instead of a
point merely  although a large thong was used in order to fill the hole 
yet it shrinks in drying and leaves the hole open  so that we fear the
boat will leak 

a large herd of buffaloe came near us and we procured three of them 
besides which were killed two wolves and three antelopes  in the course
of the day other herds of buffaloe came near our camp on their way down
the river  these herds move with great method and regularity  although
ten or twelve herds are seen scattered from each other over a space of
many miles  yet if they are undisturbed by pursuit they will be
uniformly travelling in the same direction 

saturday 6  last night there were several showers of rain and hail 
attended with thunder and lightning  and about day break a heavy storm
came on from the southwest with one continued roar of thunder  and rain
and hail  the hail which was as large as musket balls  covered the
ground completely  and on collecting some of it  it lasted during the
day and served to cool the water  the red and yellow currant is abundant
and now ripe  although still a little acid  we have seen in this
neighbourhood what we have not met before  a remarkably small fox which
associates in bands and burrows in the prairie  like the small wolf  but
have not yet been able to obtain any of them  as they are extremely
vigilant  and betake themselves on the slightest alarm to their burrows
which are very deep 

sunday 7  the weather is warm but cloudy  so that the moisture retained
by the bark after the rain leaves it slowly  though we have small fires
constantly under the boat  we have no tents  and therefore are obliged
to use the sails to keep off the bad weather  our buffaloe skins too 
are scarcely sufficient to cover our baggage  but the men are now
dressing others to replace their present leather clothing  which soon
rots by being so constantly exposed to water  in the evening the hunters
returned with the skins of only three buffaloe  two antelope  four deer 
and three wolf skins  and reported that the buffaloe had gone further
down the river  two other hunters who left us this morning could find
nothing except one elk  in addition to this we caught a beaver  the
musquitoes still disturb us very much  and the blowing flies swarm in
vast numbers round the boat  at four in the afternoon we had a light
shower of rain attended with some thunder and lightning 

monday 8  in order more fully to replace the notes of the river which
he had lost  and which he was prevented from supplying by the storm of
the twenty ninth ult  captain clarke set out after breakfast  taking
with him nearly the whole party with a view of shooting buffaloe if
there should be any near the falls  after getting some distance in the
plains the men were divided into squads  and he with two others struck
the missouri at the entrance of medicine river  and thence proceeded
down to the great cataract  he found that the immense herds of buffaloe
have entirely disappeared  and he thought had gone below the falls 
having made the necessary measurements  he returned through the plains
and reached camp late in the evening  the whole party had killed only
three buffaloe  three antelopes and a deer  they had also shot a small
fox  and brought a living ground squirrel somewhat larger than those of
the united states 

the day was warm and fair  but a slight rain fell in the afternoon  the
boat having now become sufficiently dry  we gave it a coat of the
composition  which after a proper interval was repeated  and the next
morning 

tuesday 9  she was launched into the water  and swam perfectly well  the
seats were then fixed and the oars fitted  but after we had loaded her 
as well as the canoes  and were on the point of setting out a violent
wind caused the waves to wet the baggage  so that we were forced to
unload them  the wind continued high till evening  when to our great
disappointment we discovered that nearly all the composition had
separated from the skins  and left the seams perfectly exposed  so that
the boat now leaked very much  to repair this misfortune without pitch
is impossible  and as none of that article is to be procured  we
therefore  however reluctantly  are obliged to abandon her  after having
had so much labour in the construction  we now saw that the section of
the boat covered with buffaloe skins on which hair had been left 
answered better than the elk skins and leaked but little  while that
part which was covered hair about one eighth of an inch  retained the
composition perfectly  and remained sound and dry  from this we
perceived that had we employed buffaloe instead of elk skins  and not
singed them so closely as we have done  carefully avoiding to cut the
leather in sewing  the boat would have been sufficient even with the
present composition  or had we singed instead of shaving the elk skins
we might have succeeded  but we discovered our error too late  the
buffaloe had deserted us  the travelling season was so fast advancing
that we had no time to spare for experiments  and therefore finding that
she could be no longer useful she was sunk in the water  so as to soften
the skins and enable us the more easily to take her to pieces  it now
became necessary to provide other means for transporting the baggage
which we had intended to stow in her  for this purpose we shall want two
canoes  but for many miles below the mouth of the muscleshell river to
this place  we have not seen a single tree fit to be used in that way 
the hunters however who had hitherto been sent after timber  mention
that there is a low ground on the opposite side of the river  about
eight miles above us by land  and more than twice that distance by
water  in which we may probably find trees large enough for our
purposes  captain clarke therefore determined to set out by land for
that place with ten of the best workmen who would be occupied in
building the canoes till the rest of the party  after taking the boat to
pieces and making the necessary deposits  should transport the baggage
and join them with the other six canoes 

wednesday 10  he accordingly passed over to the opposite side of the
river with his party  and proceeded on eight miles by land  the distance
by water being twenty three and three quarter miles  here he found two
cottonwood trees  but on cutting them down  one proved to be hollow 
split at the top in falling  and both were much damaged at the bottom 
he searched the neighbourhood but could find none which would suit
better  and therefore was obliged to make use of those which he had
felled  shortening them in order to avoid the cracks  and supplying the
deficiency by making them as wide as possible  they were equally at a
loss for wood of which they might make handles for their axes  the eyes
of which not being round they were obliged to split the timber in such a
manner that thirteen of the handles broke in the course of the day 
though made of the best wood they could find for the purpose  which was
the chokecherry 

the rest of the party took the frame of the boat to pieces  deposited it
in a cache or hole  with a draught of the country from fort mandan to
this place  and also some other papers and small articles of less
importance  after this we amused ourselves with fishing  and although we
had thought on our arrival that there were none in this part of the
river  we caught some of a species of white chub below the falls  but
few in number  and small in size 

serjeant ordway with four canoes and eight men had set sail in the
morning  with part of the baggage to the place where captain clarke had
fixed his camp  but the wind was so high that he only reached within
three miles of that place  and encamped for the night 

thursday  july 11  in the morning one of the canoes joined captain
clarke  the other three having on board more valuable articles  which
would have been injured by the water  went on more cautiously  and did
not reach the camp till the evening  captain clarke then had the canoes
unloaded and sent back  but the high wind prevented their floating down
nearer than about eight miles above us  his party were busily engaged
with the canoes  and their hunters supplied them with three fat deer and
a buffaloe  in addition to two deer and an antelope killed yesterday 
the few men who were with captain lewis were occupied in hunting  but
with not much success  having killed only one buffaloe  they heard about
sunset two discharges of the tremendous mountain artillery  they also
saw several very large gray eagles  much larger than those of the united
states  and most probably a distinct species  though the bald eagle of
this country is not quite so large as that of the united states  the men
have been much afflicted with painful whitlows  and one of them disabled
from working by this complaint in his hand 

friday  12  in consequence of the wind the canoes did not reach the
lower camp till late in the afternoon  before which time captain lewis
sent all the men he could spare up the river to assist in building the
boats  and the day was too far advanced to reload and send them up
before morning  the mosquitoes are very troublesome  and they have a
companion not less so  a large black gnat which does not sting  but
attacks the eyes in swarms  the party with captain clarke are employed
on the canoes  in the course of the work serjeant pryor dislocated his
shoulder yesterday  but it was replaced immediately  and though painful
does not threaten much injury  the hunters brought in three deer and two
otter  this last animal has been numerous since the water has become
sufficiently clear for them to take fish  the blue crested fisher  or as
it is sometimes called  the kingfisher  is an inhabitant of this part of
the river  it is a bird rare on the missouri  indeed we had not seen
more than three or four of them from its entrance to maria s river  and
even those did not seem to reside on the missouri but on some of the
clearer streams which empty into it  as they were seen near the mouths
of those streams 

saturday 13  the morning being fair and calm captain lewis had all the
remaining baggage embarked on board the six canoes  which sailed with
two men in each for the upper camp  then with a sick man and the indian
woman  he left the encampment  and crossing over the river went on by
land to join captain clarke  from the head of the whitebear islands he
proceeded in a southwest direction  at the distance of three miles  till
he struck the missouri  which he then followed till he reached the place
where all the party were occupied in boat building  on his way he passed
a very large indian lodge  which was probably designed as a great
council house  but it differs in its construction from all that we have
seen lower down the missouri or elsewhere  the form of it was a circle
two hundred and sixteen feet in circumference at the base  and composed
of sixteen large cottonwood poles about fifty feet long  and at their
thicker ends  which touched the ground  about the size of a man s body 
they were distributed at equal distances  except that one was omitted to
the east  probably for the entrance  from the circumference of this
circle the poles converged towards the centre where they were united and
secured by large withes of willow brush  there was no covering over this
fabric  in the centre of which were the remains of a large fire  and
round it the marks of about eighty leathern lodges  he also saw a number
of turtledoves  and some pigeons  of which he shot one differing in no
respect from the wild pigeon of the united states  the country exhibits
its usual appearances  the timber confined to the river  the country on
both sides as far as the eye can reach being entirely destitute of trees
or brush  in the low ground in which we are building the canoes  the
timber is larger and more abundant than we have seen it on the missouri
for several hundred miles  the soil too is good  for the grass and weeds
reach about two feet high  being the tallest we have observed this
season  though on the high plains and prairies the grass is at no season
above three inches in height  among these weeds are the sandrush  and
nettle in small quantities  the plains are still infested by great
numbers of the small birds already mentioned  among whom is the brown
curlew  the current of the river is here extremely gentle  the buffaloe
have not yet quite gone  for the hunters brought in three in very good
order  it requires some diligence to supply us plentifully  for as we
reserve our parched meal for the rocky mountains  where we do not expect
to find much game  our principal article of food is meat  and the
consumption of the whole thirty two persons belonging to the party 
amounts to four deer  an elk and a deer  one buffaloe every twenty four
hours  the musquitoes and gnats persecute us as violently as below  so
that we can get no sleep unless defended by biers  with which we are all
provided  we here found several plants hitherto unknown to us  and of
which we preserved specimens 

serjeant ordway proceeded with the six canoes five miles up the river 
but the wind becoming so high as to wet the baggage he was obliged to
unload and dry it  the wind abated at five o clock in the evening  when
he again proceeded eight miles and encamped  the next morning 

sunday  july 14  he joined us about noon  on leaving the whitebear camp
he passed at a short distance a little creek or run coming in on the
left  this had been already examined and called flattery run  it
contains back water only  with very extensive low grounds  which rising
into large plains reach the mountains on the east  then passed a willow
island on the left within one mile and a half  and reached two miles
further a cliff of rocks in a bend on the same side  in the course of
another mile and a half he passed two islands covered with cottonwood 
box alder  sweet willow  and the usual undergrowth  like that of the
whitebear islands  at thirteen and three quarter miles he came to the
mouth of a small creek on the left  within the following nine miles he
passed three timbered islands  and after making twenty three and a
quarter miles from the lower camp  arrived at the point of woodland on
the north where the canoes were constructed 

the day was fair and warm  the men worked very industriously  and were
enabled by the evening to lanch the boats  which now want only seats and
oars to be complete  one of them is twenty five  the other thirty three
feet in length and three feet wide  captain lewis walked out between
three and four miles over the rocky bluffs to a high situation  two
miles from the river  a little below fort mountain creek  the country
which he saw was in most parts level  but occasionally became varied by
gentle rises and descents  but with no timber except along the water 
from this position  the point at which the missouri enters the first
chain of the rocky mountains bore south 28 degrees west about
twenty five miles  according to our estimate 

the northern extremity of that chain north 73 degrees west at the
distance of eighty miles 

to the same extremity of the second chain north 65 degrees west one
hundred and fifty miles 

to the most remote point of a third and continued chain of these
mountains north 50 degrees west about two hundred miles 

the direction of the first chain was from south 20 degrees east to north
20 degrees west  of the second  from south 45 degrees east to north 45
degrees west  but the eye could not reach their southern extremities 
which most probably may be traced to mexico  in a course south 75
degrees west  and at the distance of eight miles is a mountain  which
from its appearance we shall call fort mountain  it is situated in the
level plain  and forms nearly a square  each side of which is a mile in
extent  these sides  which are composed of a yellow clay with no mixture
of rock or stone whatever  rise perpendicularly to the height of three
hundred feet  where the top becomes a level plain covered  as captain
lewis now observed  with a tolerably fertile mould two feet thick  on
which was a coat of grass similar to that of the plain below  it has the
appearance of being perfectly inaccessible  and although the mounds near
the falls somewhat resemble it  yet none of them are so large 




                                chapter xii 

     the party embark on board the canoes  description of smith s
     river  character of the country   c   dearborne s river
     described  captain clarke precedes the party for the purpose of
     discovering the indians of the rocky mountains  magnificent rocky
     appearances on the borders of the river denominated the gates of
     the rocky mountains  captain clarke arrives at the three forks of
     the missouri without overtaking the indians  the party arrive at
     the three forks  of which a particular and interesting description
     is given 


monday  july 15  we rose early  embarked all our baggage on board the
canoes  which though light in number are still heavily loaded  and at
ten o clock set out on our journey  at the distance of three miles we
passed an island  just above which is a small creek coming in from the
left  which we called fort mountain creek  the channel of which is ten
yards wide but now perfectly dry  at six miles we came to an island
opposite to a bend towards the north side  and reached at seven and a
half miles the lower point of a woodland at the entrance of a beautiful
river  which in honour of the secretary of the navy we called smith s
river  this stream falls into a bend on the south side of the missouri 
and is eighty yards wide  as far as we could discern its course it wound
through a charming valley towards the southeast  in which many herds of
buffaloe were feeding  till at the distance of twenty five miles it
entered the rocky mountains  and was lost from our view  after dining
near this place we proceeded on four and three quarter miles to the head
of an island  four and a quarter miles beyond which is a second island
on the left  three and a quarter miles further in a bend of the river
towards the north  is a wood where we encamped for the night  after
making nineteen and three quarter miles 

we find the prickly pear  one of the greatest beauties as well as the
greatest inconveniences of the plains  now in full bloom  the sunflower
too  a plant common on every part of the missouri from its entrance to
this place  is here very abundant and in bloom  the lambsquarter 
wild cucumber  sandrush  and narrowdock are also common  two elk  a
deer  and an otter  were our game to day 

the river has now become so much more crooked than below that we omit
taking all its short meanders  but note only its general course  and lay
down the small bends on our daily chart by the eye  the general width is
from one hundred to one hundred and fifty yards  along the banks are
large beds of sand raised above the plains  and as they always appear on
the sides of the river opposite to the southwest exposure  seem
obviously brought there from the channel of the river by the incessant
winds from that quarter  we find also more timber than for a great
distance below the falls 

tuesday 16  there was a heavy dew last night  we soon passed about forty
little booths  formed of willow bushes as a shelter against the sun 
these seemed to have been deserted about ten days  and as we supposed by
the snake indians  or shoshonees  whom we hope soon to meet  as they
appeared from the tracks to have a number of horses with them  at three
and three quarter miles we passed a creek or run in a bend on the left
side  and four miles further another run or small rivulet on the right 
after breakfasting on a buffaloe shot by one of the hunters  captain
lewis resolved to go on ahead of the party to the point where the river
enters the rocky mountains and make the necessary observations before
our arrival  he therefore set out with drewyer and two of the sick men
to whom he supposed the walk would be useful  he travelled on the north
side of the river through a handsome level plain  which continued on the
opposite side also  and at the distance of eight miles passed a small
stream on which he observed a considerable quantity of the aspen tree  a
little before twelve o clock he halted on a bend to the north in a low
ground well covered with timber  about four and a half miles below the
mountains  and obtained a meridian altitude  by which he found the
latitude was n  46 degrees 46  50  2    his route then lay through a
high waving plain to a rapid where the missouri first leaves the rocky
mountains  and here he encamped for the night 

in the meantime we had proceeded after breakfast one mile to a bend in
the left  opposite to which was the frame of a large lodge situated in
the prairie  constructed like that already mentioned above the whitebear
islands  but only sixty feet in diameter  round it were the remains of
about eighty leathern lodges  all which seemed to have been built during
the last autumn  within the next fifteen and a quarter miles we passed
ten islands  on the last of which we encamped near the right shore 
having made twenty three miles  the next morning 

wednesday 17  we set out early  and at four miles distance joined
captain lewis at foot of the rapids  and after breakfast began the
passage of them  some of the articles most liable to be injured by the
water were carried round  we then double manned the canoes  and with the
aid of the towing line got them up without accident  for several miles
below the rapids the current of the missouri becomes stronger as you
approach  and the spurs of the mountains advance towards the river 
which is deep and not more than seventy yards wide  at the rapids the
river is closely hemmed in on both sides by the hills  and foams for
half a mile over the rocks which obstruct its channel  the low grounds
are now not more than a few yards in width  but they furnish room for an
indian road which winds under the hills on the north side of the river 
the general range of these hills is from southeast to northwest  and the
cliffs themselves are about eight hundred feet above the water  formed
almost entirely of a hard black granite  on which are scattered a few
dwarf pine and cedar trees  immediately in the gap is a large rock four
hundred feet high  which on one side is washed by the missouri  while on
its other sides a handsome little plain separates it from the
neighbouring mountains  it may be ascended with some difficulty nearly
to its summit  and affords a beautiful prospect of the plains below  in
which we could observe large herds of buffaloe  after ascending the
rapids for half a mile we came to a small island at the head of them 
which we called pine island from a large pine tree at the lower end of
it  which is the first we have seen near the river for a great distance 
a mile beyond captain lewis s camp we had a meridian altitude which gave
us the latitude of 46 degrees 42  14  7    as the canoes were still
heavily loaded all those not employed in working them walked on shore 
the navigation is now very laborious  the river is deep but with little
current and from seventy to one hundred yards wide  the low grounds are
very narrow  with but little timber and that chiefly the aspen tree  the
cliffs are steep and hang over the river so much that often we could not
cross them  but were obliged to pass and repass from one side of the
river to the other in order to make our way  in some places the banks
are formed of rocks  of dark black granite rising perpendicularly to a
great height  through which the river seems in the progress of time to
have worn its channel  on these mountains we see more pine than usual 
but it is still in small quantities  along the bottoms  which have a
covering of high grass  we observe the sunflower blooming in great
abundance  the indians of the missouri  and more especially those who do
not cultivate maize  make great use of the seed of this plant for bread
or in thickening their soup  they first parch and then pound it between
two stones until it is reduced to a fine meal  sometimes they add a
portion of water  and drink it thus diluted  at other times they add a
sufficient proportion of marrow grease to reduce it to the consistency
of common dough and eat it in that manner  this last composition we
preferred to all the rest  and thought it at that time a very palatable
dish  there is however little of the broad leafed cottonwood on this
side of the falls  much the greater part of what we see being of the
narrow leafed species  there are also great quantities of red  purple 
yellow and black currants  the currants are very pleasant to the taste 
and much preferable to those of our common garden  the bush rises to the
height of six or eight feet  the stem simple  branching and erect  these
shrubs associate in corps either in upper or timbered lands near the
water courses  the leaf is peteolate  of a pale green  and in form
resembles the red currant so common in our gardens  the perianth of the
fruit is one leaved  five cleft  abbriviated and tubular  the corolla is
monopetallous  funnel shaped  very long  and of a fine orange colour 
there are five stamens and one pistillum of the first  the filaments are
capillar  inserted in the corolla  equal and converging  the anther
ovate and incumbent  the germ of the second species is round  smooth 
inferior and pidicelled  the style long and thicker than the stamens 
simple  cylindrical  smooth and erect  it remains with the corolla until
the fruit is ripe  the stamen is simple and obtuse  and the fruit much
the size and shape of our common garden currants  growing like them in
clusters supported by a compound footstalk  the peduncles are longer in
this species  and the berries are more scattered  the fruit is not so
acid as the common currant  and has a more agreeable flavour 

the other species differs in no respect from the yellow currant
excepting in the colour and flavour of the berries 

the serviceberry differs in some points from that of the united states 
the bushes are small  sometimes not more than two feet high  and rarely
exceed eight inches  they are proportionably small in their stems 
growing very thickly  associated in clumps  the fruit is of the same
form  but for the most part larger and of a very dark purple  they are
now ripe and in great perfection  there are two species of gooseberry
here  but neither of them yet ripe  nor are the chokecherry  though in
great quantities  besides there are also at that place the box alder 
red willow and a species of sumach  in the evening we saw some mountain
rams or big horned animals  but no other game of any sort  after leaving
pine island we passed a small run on the left  which is formed by a
large spring rising at the distance of half a mile under the mountain 
one mile and a half above the island is another  and two miles further a
third island  the river making small bends constantly to the north  from
this last island to a point of rocks on the south side the low grounds
become rather wider  and three quarters of a mile beyond these rocks  in
a bend on the north  we encamped opposite to a very high cliff  having
made during the day eleven and a half miles 

thursday 18  this morning early before our departure we saw a large herd
of the big horned animals  who were bounding among the rocks in the
opposite cliff with great agility  these inaccessible spots secure them
from all their enemies  and the only danger is in wandering among these
precipices  where we should suppose it scarcely possible for any animal
to stand  a single false step would precipitate them at least five
hundred feet into the water  at one mile and a quarter we passed another
single cliff on the left  at the same distance beyond which is the mouth
of a large river emptying itself from the north  it is a handsome  bold 
and clear stream  eighty yards wide  that is nearly as broad as the
missouri  with a rapid current over a bed of small smooth stones of
various figures  the water is extremely transparent  the low grounds are
narrow  but possess as much wood as those of the missouri  and it has
every appearance of being navigable  though to what distance we cannot
ascertain  as the country which it waters  is broken and mountainous  in
honour of the secretary at war we called it dearborn s river  being now
very anxious to meet with the shoshonees or snake indians  for the
purpose of obtaining the necessary information of our route  as well as
to procure horses  it was thought best for one of us to go forward with
a small party and endeavour to discover them  before the daily discharge
of our guns  which is necessary for our subsistence  should give them
notice of our approach  if by an accident they hear us  they will most
probably retreat to the mountains  mistaking us for their enemies who
usually attack them on this side  accordingly captain clarke set out
with three men  and followed the course of the river on the north side 
but the hills were so steep at first that he was not able to go much
faster than ourselves  in the evening however he cut off many miles of
the circuitous course of the river  by crossing a mountain over which he
found a wide indian road which in many places seems to have been cut or
dug down in the earth  he passed also two branches of a stream which he
called ordway s creek  where he saw a number of beaver dams extending in
close succession towards the mountains as far as he could distinguish 
on the cliffs were many of the big horned animals  after crossing this
mountain he encamped near a small stream of running water  having
travelled twenty miles 

on leaving dearborn s river we passed at three and a half miles a small
creek  and at six beyond it an island on the north side of the river 
which makes within that distance many small bends  at two and a half
miles further is another island  three quarters of a mile beyond this is
a small creek on the north side  at a mile and a half above the creek is
a much larger stream thirty yards wide  and discharging itself with a
bold current on the north side  the banks are low  and the bed formed of
stones altogether  to this stream we gave the name of ordway s creek 
after serjeant john ordway  at two miles beyond this the valley widens 
we passed several bends of the river  and encamped in the centre of one
on the south  having made twenty one miles  here we found a small grove
of the narrow leafed cottonwood  there being no longer any of the
broad leafed kind since we entered the mountains  the water of these
rivulets which come down from the mountains is very cold  pure  and well
tasted  along their banks as well as on the missouri the aspen is very
common  but of a small kind  the river is somewhat wider than we found
it yesterday  the hills more distant from the river and not so high 
there are some pines on the mountains  but they are principally confined
to the upper regions of them  the low grounds are still narrower and
have little or no timber  the soil near the river is good  and produces
a luxuriant growth of grass and weeds  among these productions the
sunflower holds a very distinguished place  for several days past we
have observed a species of flax in the low grounds  the leaf stem and
pericarp of which resemble those of the flax commonly cultivated in the
united states  the stem rises to the height of two and a half or three
feet  and spring to the number of eight or ten from the same root  with
a strong thick bark apparently well calculated for use  the root seems
to be perennial  and it is probable that the cutting of the stems may
not at all injure it  for although the seeds are not yet ripe  there are
young suckers shooting up from the root  whence we may infer that the
stems which are fully grown and in the proper stage of vegetation to
produce the best flax  are not essential to the preservation or support
of the root  a circumstance which would render it a most valuable plant 
to day we have met with a second species of flax smaller than the first 
as it seldom obtains a greater height than nine or twelve inches  the
leaf and stem resemble those of the species just mentioned  except that
the latter is rarely branched  and bears a single monopetalous
bell shaped blue flower  suspended with its limb downwards  we saw
several herds of the big horn  but they were in the cliffs beyond our
reach  we killed an elk this morning and found part of a deer which had
been left for us by captain clarke  he pursued his route 

friday  19  early in the morning  and soon passed the remains of several
indian camps formed of willow brush  which seemed to have been deserted
this spring  at the same time he observed that the pine trees had been
stripped of their bark about the same season  which our indian woman say
her countrymen do in order to obtain the sap and the soft parts of the
wood and bark for food  about eleven o clock he met a herd of elk and
killed two of them  but such was the want of wood in the neighbourhood
that he was unable to procure enough to make a fire  and he was
therefore obliged to substitute the dung of the buffaloe  with which he
cooked his breakfast  they then resumed their course along an old indian
road  in the afternoon they reached a handsome valley watered by a large
creek  both of which extend a considerable distance into the mountain 
this they crossed  and during the evening travelled over a mountainous
country covered with sharp fragments of flint rock  these bruised and
cut their feet very much  but were scarcely less troublesome than the
prickly pear of the open plains  which have now become so abundant that
it is impossible to avoid them  and the thorns are so strong that they
pierce a double soal of dressed deer skin  the best resource against
them is a soal of buffaloe hide in parchment  at night they reached the
river much fatigued  having passed two mountains in the course of the
day and having travelled thirty miles  captain clarke s first employment
on lighting a fire was to extract from his feet the briars  which he
found seventeen in number 

in the meantime we proceeded on very well  though the water appears to
increase in rapidity as we advance  the current has indeed been strong
during the day and obstructed by some rapids  which are not however much
broken by rocks  and are perfectly safe  the river is deep  and its
general width is from one hundred to one hundred and fifty yards wide 
for more than thirteen miles we went along the numerous bends of the
river and then reached two small islands  three and three quarter miles
beyond which is a small creek in a bend to the left  above a small
island on the right side of the river  we were regaled about ten o clock
p m  with a thunder storm of rain and hail which lasted for an hour  but
during the day in this confined valley  through which we are passing 
the heat is almost insupportable  yet whenever we obtain a glimpse of
the lofty tops of the mountains we are tantalized with a view of the
snow  these mountains have their sides and summits partially varied with
little copses of pine  cedar  and balsam fir  a mile and a half beyond
this creek the rocks approach the river on both sides  forming a most
sublime and extraordinary spectacle  for five and three quarter miles
these rocks rise perpendicularly from the water s edge to the height of
nearly twelve hundred feet  they are composed of a black granite near
its base  but from its lighter colour above and from the fragments we
suppose the upper part to be flint of a yellowish brown and cream
colour  nothing can be imagined more tremendous than the frowning
darkness of these rocks  which project over the river and menace us with
destruction  the river  of one hundred and fifty yards in width  seems
to have forced its channel down this solid mass  but so reluctantly has
it given way that during the whole distance the water is very deep even
at the edges  and for the first three miles there is not a spot except
one of a few yards  in which a man could stand between the water and the
towering perpendicular of the mountain  the convulsion of the passage
must have been terrible  since at its outlet there are vast columns of
rock torn from the mountain which are strewed on both sides of the
river  the trophies as it were of the victory  several fine springs
burst out from the chasms of the rock  and contribute to increase the
river  which has now a strong current  but very fortunately we are able
to overcome it with our oars  since it would be impossible to use
either the cord or the pole  we were obliged to go on some time after
dark  not being able to find a spot large enough to encamp on  but at
length about two miles above a small inland in the middle of the river
we met with a spot on the left side  where we procured plenty of
lightwood and pitchpine  this extraordinary range of rocks we called the
gates of the rocky mountains  we had made twenty two miles  and four and
a quarter miles from the entrance of the gates  the mountains are higher
to day than they were yesterday  we saw some big horns  a few antelopes
and beaver  but since entering the mountains have found no buffaloe  the
otter are however in great plenty  the musquitoes have become less
troublesome than they were 

saturday 20  by employing the towrope whenever the banks permitted the
use of it  the river being too deep for the pole  we were enabled to
overcome the current which is still strong  at the distance of half a
mile we came to a high rock in a bend to the left in the gates  here the
perpendicular rocks cease  the hills retire from the river  and the
vallies suddenly widen to a greater extent than they have been since we
entered the mountains  at this place was some scattered timber 
consisting of the narrow leafed cottonwood  the aspen  and pine  there
are also vast quantities of gooseberries  serviceberries  and several
species of currant  among which is one of a black colour  the flavour of
which is preferable to that of the yellow  and would be deemed superior
to that of any currant in the united states  we here killed an elk which
was a pleasant addition to our stock of food  at a mile from the gates 
a large creek comes down from the mountains and empties itself behind an
island in the middle of a bend to the north  to this stream which is
fifteen yards wide we gave the name of potts s creek  after john potts 
one of our men  up this valley about seven miles we discovered a great
smoke  as if the whole country had been set on fire  but were at a loss
to decide whether it had been done accidentally by captain clarke s
party  or by the indians as a signal on their observing us  we
afterwards learnt that this last was the fact  for they had heard a gun
fired by one of captain clarke s men  and believing that their enemies
were approaching had fled into the mountains  first setting fire to the
plains as a warning to their countrymen  we continued our course along
several islands  and having made in the course of the day fifteen miles 
encamped just above an island  at a spring on a high bank on the left
side of the river  in the latter part of the evening we had passed
through a low range of mountains  and the country became more open 
though still unbroken and without timber  and the lowlands not very
extensive  and just above our camp the river is again closed in by the
mountains  we found on the banks an elk which captain clarke had left
us  with a note mentioning that he should pass the mountains just above
us and wait our arrival at some convenient place  we saw but could not
procure some redheaded ducks and sandhill cranes along the sides of the
river  and a woodpecker about the size of the lark woodpecker  which
seems to be a distinct species  it is as black as a crow with a long
tail  and flies like a jaybird  the whole country is so infested by the
prickly pear that we could scarcely find room to lie down at our camp 

captain clarke on setting out this morning had gone through the valley
about six miles to the right of the river  he soon fell into an old
indian road which he pursued till he reached the missouri  at the
distance of eighteen miles from his last encampment  just above the
entrance of a large creek  which we afterwards called whiteearth creek 
here he found his party so much cut and pierced with the sharp flint and
the prickly pear that he proceeded only a small distance further  and
then halted to wait for us  along his track he had taken the precaution
to strew signals  such as pieces of cloth  paper and linen  to prove to
the indians  if by accident they met his track  that we were white men 
but he observed a smoke some distance ahead  and concluded that the
whole country had now taken the alarm 

sunday 21  on leaving our camp we passed an island at half a mile  and
reached at one mile a bad rapid at the place where the river leaves the
mountain  here the cliffs are high and covered with fragments of broken
rocks  the current is also strong  but although more rapid the river is
wider and shallower  so that we are able to use the pole occasionally 
though we principally depend on the towline  on leaving this rapid which
is about half a mile in extent  the country opens on each side  the
hills become lower  at one mile is a large island on the left side  and
four and a half beyond it a large and bold creek twenty eight yards
wide  coming in from the north  where it waters a handsome valley  we
called it pryor s creek after one of the sergeants  john pryor  at a
mile above this creek on the left side of the missouri we obtained a
meridian altitude  which gave 46 degrees 10  32  9   as the latitude of
the place  for the following four miles  the country  like that through
which we passed during the rest of the day  is rough and mountainous as
we found it yesterday  but at the distance of twelve miles  we came
towards evening into a beautiful plain ten or twelve miles wide and
extending as far the eye could reach  this plain or rather valley is
bounded by two nearly parallel ranges of high mountains whose summits
are partially covered with snow  below which the pine is scattered along
the sides down to the plain in some places  though the greater part of
their surface has no timber and exhibits only a barren soil with no
covering except dry parched grass or black rugged rocks  on entering the
valley the river assumes a totally different aspect  it spreads to more
than a mile in width  and though more rapid than before  is shallow
enough in almost every part for the use of the pole  while its bed is
formed of smooth stones and some large rocks  as it has been indeed
since we entered the mountains  it is also divided by a number of
islands some of which are large near the northern shore  the soil of the
valley is a rich black loam apparently very fertile  and covered with a
fine green grass about eighteen inches or two feet in height  while that
of the high grounds is perfectly dry and seems scorched by the sun  the
timber though still scarce is in greater quantities in this valley than
we have seen it since entering the mountains  and seems to prefer the
borders of the small creeks to the banks of the river itself  we
advanced three and a half miles in this valley and encamped on the left
side  having made in all fifteen and a half miles 

our only large game to day was one deer  we saw however two pheasants of
a dark brown colour  much larger than the same species of bird in the
united states  in the morning too  we saw three swans which  like the
geese  have not yet recovered the feathers of the wing  and were unable
to fly  we killed two of them  and the third escaped by diving and
passing down the current  these are the first we have seen on the river
for a great distance  and as they had no young with them  we presume
that they do not breed in this neighbourhood  of the geese we daily see
great numbers  with their young perfectly feathered except on the wings 
where both young and old are deficient  the first are very fine food 
but the old ones are poor and unfit for use  several of the large brown
or sandhill crane are feeding in the low grounds on the grass which
forms their principal food  the young crane cannot fly at this season 
they are as large as a turkey  of a bright reddish bay colour  since the
river has become shallow we have caught a number of trout to day  and a
fish  white on the belly and sides  but of a bluish cast on the back 
and a long pointed mouth opening somewhat like that of the shad 

this morning captain clarke wishing to hunt but fearful of alarming the
indians  went up the river for three miles  when finding neither any of
them nor of their recent tracks returned  and then his little party
separated to look for game  they killed two bucks and a doe  and a young
curlew nearly feathered  in the evening they found the musquitoes as
troublesome as we did  these animals attack us as soon as the labours
and fatigues of the day require some rest  and annoy us till several
hours after dark  when the coldness of the air obliges them to
disappear  but such is their persecution that were it not for our biers
we should obtain no repose 

monday  22  we set out at an early hour  the river being divided into so
many channels by both large and small islands  that it was impossible to
lay it down accurately by following in a canoe any single channel 
captain lewis walked on shore  took the general courses of the river 
and from the rising grounds laid down the situation of the islands and
channels  which he was enabled to do with perfect accuracy  the view not
being obstructed by much timber  at one mile and a quarter we passed an
island somewhat larger than the rest  and four miles further reached the
upper end of another  on which we breakfasted  this is a large island
forming in the middle of a bend to the north a level fertile plain ten
feet above the surface of the water and never overflowed  here we found
great quantities of a small onion about the size of a musket ball 
though some were larger  it is white  crisp  and as well flavoured as
any of our garden onions  the seed is just ripening  and as the plant
bears a large quantity to the square foot  and stands the rigours of the
climate  it will no doubt be an acquisition to settlers  from this
production we called it onion island  during the next seven and three
quarter miles we passed several long circular bends  and a number of
large and small islands which divide the river into many channels  and
then reached the mouth of a creek on the north side  it is composed of
three creeks which unite in a handsome valley about four miles before
they discharge themselves into the missouri  where it is about fifteen
feet wide and eight feet deep  with clear transparent water  here we
halted for dinner  but as the canoes took different channels in
ascending it was some time before they all joined  here we were
delighted to find that the indian woman recognizes the country  she
tells us that to this creek her countrymen make excursions to procure a
white paint on its banks  and we therefore call it whiteearth creek  she
says also that the three forks of the missouri are at no great distance 
a piece of intelligence which has cheered the spirits of us all  as we
hope soon to reach the head of that river  this is the warmest day
except one we have experienced this summer  in the shade the mercury
stood at 80 degrees above 0  which is the second time it has reached
that height during this season  we encamped on an island after making
nineteen and three quarter miles 

in the course of the day we saw many geese  cranes  small birds common
to the plains  and a few pheasants  we also observed a small plover or
curlew of a brown colour  about the size of the yellow legged plover or
jack curlew  but of a different species  it first appeared near the
mouth of smith s river  but is so shy and vigilant that we were unable
to shoot it  both the broad and narrow leafed willow continue  though
the sweet willow has become very scarce  the rosebush  small
honeysuckle  the pulpy leafed thorn  southern wood  sage and box alder 
narrow leafed cottonwood  redwood  and a species of sumach  are all
abundant  so too are the red and black gooseberries  serviceberries 
chokecherry  and the black  red  yellow  and purple currant  which last
seems to be a favourite food of the bear  before encamping we landed and
took on board captain clarke with the meat he had collected during this
day s hunt  which consisted of one deer and an elk  we had ourselves
shot a deer and an antelope  the musquitoes and gnats were unusually
fierce this evening 

tuesday  23  captain clarke again proceeded with four men along the
right bank  during the whole day the river divided by a number of
islands  which spread it out sometimes to the distance of three miles 
the current is very rapid and has many ripples  and the bed formed of
gravel and smooth stones  the banks along the low grounds are of a rich
loam  followed occasionally by low bluffs of yellow and red clay  with a
hard red slatestone intermixed  the low grounds are wide  and have very
little timber but a thick underbrush of willow  and rose and currant
bushes  these are succeeded by high plains extending on each side to the
base of the mountains  which lie parallel to the river about eight or
twelve miles apart  and are high and rocky  with some small pine and
cedar interspersed on them  at the distance of seven miles a creek
twenty yards wide  after meandering through a beautiful low ground on
the left for several miles parallel to the river  empties itself near a
cluster of small islands  the stream we called whitehouse creek after
joseph whitehouse one of the party  and the islands from their number
received the name of the  ten islands   about ten o clock we came up
with drewyer  who had gone out to hunt yesterday  and not being able to
find our encampment had staid out all night  he now supplied us with
five deer  three and a quarter miles beyond whitehouse creek we came to
the lower point of an island where the river is three hundred yards
wide  and continued along it for one mile and a quarter  and then passed
a second island just above it  we halted rather early for dinner in
order to dry some part of the baggage which had been wet in the canoes 
we then proceeded  and at five and a half miles had passed two small
islands  within the next three miles we came to a large island  which
from its figure we called broad island  from that place we made three
and a half miles  and encamped on an island to the left  opposite to a
much larger one on the right  our journey to day was twenty two and a
quarter miles  the greater part of which was made by means of our poles
and cords  the use of which the banks much favoured  during the whole
time we had the small flags hoisted in the canoes to apprise the
indians  if there were any in the neighbourhood  of our being white men
and their friends  but we were not so fortunate as to discover any of
them  along the shores we saw great quantities of the common thistle 
and procured a further supply of wild onions and a species of garlic
growing on the highlands  which is now green and in bloom  it has a flat
leaf  and is strong  tough  and disagreeable  there was also much of the
wild flax  of which we now obtained some ripe seed  as well as some
bullrush and cattail flag  among the animals we met with a black snake
about two feet long  with the belly as dark as any other part of the
body  which was perfectly black  and which had one hundred and
twenty eight scuta on the belly and sixty three on the tail  we also saw
antelopes  crane  geese  ducks  beaver  and otter  and took up four deer
which had been left on the water side by captain clarke  he had pursued
all day an indian road on the right side of the river  and encamped late
in the evening at the distance of twenty five miles from our camp of
last night  in the course of his walk he met besides deer a number of
antelopes and a herd of elk  but all the tracks of indians  though
numerous  were of an old date 

wednesday  24  we proceeded for four and a quarter miles along several
islands to a small run  just above which the low bluffs touch the river 
within three and a half miles further we came to a small island on the
north  and a remarkable bluff composed of earth of a crimson colour 
intermixed with stratas of slate  either black or of a red resembling
brick  the following six and three quarter miles brought us to an
assemblage of islands  having passed four at different distances  and
within the next five miles we met the same number of islands  and
encamped on the north after making nineteen and a half miles  the
current of the river was strong and obstructed  as indeed it has been
for some days by small rapids or ripples which descend from one to three
feet in the course of one hundred and fifty yards  but they are rarely
incommoded by any fixed rocks  and therefore  though the water is rapid 
the passage is not attended with danger  the valley through which the
river passes is like that of yesterday  the nearest hills generally
concealing the most distant from us  but when we obtain a view of them
they present themselves in amphitheatre  rising above each other as they
recede from the river till the most remote are covered with snow  we saw
many otter and beaver to day  the latter seem to contribute very much to
the number of islands and the widening of the river  they begin by
damming up the small channels of about twenty yards between the islands 
this obliges the river to seek another outlet  and as soon as this is
effected the channel stopped by the beaver becomes filled with mud and
sand  the industrious animal is then driven to another channel which
soon shares the same fate  till the river spreads on all sides  and cuts
the projecting points of the land into islands  we killed a deer and saw
great numbers of antelopes  cranes  some geese  and a few redheaded
ducks  the small birds of the plains and the curlew are still abundant 
we saw but could not come within gunshot of a large bear  there is much
of the track of elk but none of the animals themselves  and from the
appearance of bones and old excrement  we suppose that buffaloe have
sometimes strayed into the valley  though we have as yet seen no recent
sign of them  along the water are a number of snakes  some of a brown
uniform colour  others black  and a third speckled on the abdomen  and
striped with black and a brownish yellow in the back and sides  the
first  which are the largest  are about four feet long  the second is of
the kind mentioned yesterday  and the third resembles in size and
appearance the garter snake of the united states  on examining the teeth
of all these several kinds we found them free from poison  they are fond
of the water  in which they take shelter on being pursued  the
mosquitoes  gnats  and prickly pear  our three persecutors  still
continue with us  and joined with the labour of working the canoes have
fatigued us all excessively  captain clarke continued along the indian
road which led him up a creek  about ten o clock he saw at the distance
of six miles a horse feeding in the plains  he went towards him  but the
animal was so wild that he could not get within several hundred paces of
him  he then turned obliquely to the river where he killed a deer and
dined  having passed in this valley five handsome streams  only one of
which had any timber  another had some willows  and was very much dammed
up by the beaver  after dinner he continued his route along the river
and encamped at the distance of thirty miles  as he went along he saw
many tracks of indians  but none of recent date  the next morning 

thursday  25  at the distance of a few miles he arrived at the three
forks of the missouri  here he found that the plains had been recently
burnt on the north side  and saw the track of a horse which seemed to
have passed about four or five days since  after breakfast he examined
the rivers  and finding that the north branch  although not larger 
contained more water than the middle branch  and bore more to the
westward  he determined to ascend it  he therefore left a note informing
captain lewis of his intention  and then went up that stream on the
north side for about twenty five miles  here chaboneau was unable to
proceed any further  and the party therefore encamped  all of them much
fatigued  their feet blistered and wounded by the prickly pear 

in the meantime we left our camp  and proceeded on very well  though the
water is still rapid and has some occasional ripples  the country is
much like that of yesterday  there are however fewer islands  for we
passed only two  behind one of them is a large creek twenty five yards
wide  to which we gave the name of gass s creek  from one of our
serjeants  patrick gass  it is formed by the union of five streams 
which descend from the mountains and join in the plain near the river 
on this island we saw a large brown bear  but he retreated to the shore
and ran off before we could approach him  these animals seem more shy
than they were below the mountains  the antelopes have again collected
in small herds  composed of several females with their young  attended
by one or two males  though some of the males are still solitary or
wander in parties of two over the plains  which the antelope invariably
prefers to the woodlands  and to which it always retreats if by accident
it is found straggling in the hills  confiding no doubt in its wonderful
fleetness  we also killed a few young geese  but as this game is small
and very incompetent to the subsistence of the party  we have forbidden
the men any longer to waste their ammunition on them  about four and a
half miles above gass s creek  the valley in which we have been
travelling ceases  the high craggy cliffs again approach the river 
which now enters or rather leaves what appears to be a second great
chain of the rocky mountains  about a mile after entering these hills or
low mountains we passed a number of fine bold springs  which burst out
near the edge of the river under the cliffs on the left  and furnished a
fine freestone water  near these we met with two of the worst rapids we
have seen since entering the mountains  a ridge of sharp pointed rocks
stretching across the river  leaving but small and dangerous channels
for the navigation  the cliffs are of a lighter colour than those we
have already passed  and in the bed of the river is some limestone which
is small and worn smooth  and seems to have been brought down by the
current  we went about a mile further and encamped under a high bluff on
the right opposite to a cliff of rocks  having made sixteen miles 

all these cliffs appeared to have been undermined by the water at some
period  and fallen down from the hills on their sides  the stratas of
rock sometimes lying with their edges upwards  others not detached from
the hills are depressed obliquely on the side next the river as if they
had sunk to fill up the cavity formed by the washing of the river 

in the open places among the rocky cliffs are two kinds of gooseberry 
one yellow and the other red  the former species was observed for the
first time near the falls  the latter differs from it in no respect
except in colour and in being of a larger size  both have a sweet
flavour  and are rather indifferent fruit 

friday 26  we again found the current strong and the ripples frequent 
these we were obliged to overcome by means of the cord and the pole  the
oar being scarcely ever used except in crossing to take advantage of the
shore  within three and three quarter miles we passed seven small
islands and reached the mouth of a large creek which empties itself in
the centre of a bend on the left side  it is a bold running stream
fifteen yards wide  and received the name of howard creek after john p 
howard one of the party  one mile beyond it is a small run which falls
in on the same side just above a rocky cliff  here the mountains recede
from the river  and the valley widens to the extent of several miles 
the river now becomes crowded with islands of which we passed ten in the
next thirteen and three quarter miles  then at the distance of eighteen
miles we encamped on the left shore near a rock in the centre of a bend
towards the left  and opposite to two more islands  this valley has wide
low grounds covered with high grass  and in many with a fine turf of
green sward  the soil of the highlands is thin and meagre  without any
covering except a low sedge and a dry kind of grass which is almost as
inconvenient as the prickly pear  the seeds of it are armed with a long
twisted hard beard at their upper extremity  while the lower part is a
sharp firm point  beset at its base with little stiff bristles  with the
points in a direction contrary to the subulate point to which they
answer as a barb  we see also another species of prickly pear  it is of
a globular form  composed of an assemblage of little conic leaves
springing from a common root to which their small points are attached
as a common centre  and the base of the cone forms the apex of the leaf
which is garnished with a circular range of sharp thorns like the
cochineal plant  and quite as stiff and even more keen than those of the
common flat leafed species  between the hills the river had been
confined within one hundred and fifty or two hundred yards  but in the
valley it widens to two hundred or two hundred and fifty yards  and
sometimes is spread by its numerous islands to the distance of three
quarters of a mile  the banks are low  but the river never overflows
them  on entering the valley we again saw the snow clad mountains before
us  but the appearance of the hills as well as of the timber near us is
much as heretofore 

finding chaboneau unable to proceed captain clarke left him with one of
the men  and accompanied by the other went up the river about twelve
miles to the top of a mountain  here he had an extensive view of the
river valley upwards and saw a large creek which flowed in on the right
side  he however discovered no fresh sign of the indians  and therefore
determined to examine the middle branch and join us by the time we
reached the forks  he descended the mountain by an indian path which
wound through a deep valley  and at length reached a fine cold spring 
the day had been very warm  the path unshaded by timber  and his thirst
was excessive  he was therefore tempted to drink  but although he took
the precaution of previously wetting his head  feet and hands  he soon
found himself very unwell  he continued his route  and after resting
with chaboneau at his camp  resumed his march across the north fork near
a large island  the first part was knee deep  but on the other side of
the island the water came to their waists and was so rapid that
chaboneau was on the point of being swept away  and not being able to
swim would have perished if captain clarke had not rescued him  while
crossing the island they killed two brown bear and saw great quantities
of beaver  he then went on to a small river which falls into the north
fork some miles above its junction with the two others  here  finding
himself grow more unwell  he halted for the night at the distance of
four miles from his last encampment 

saturday 27  we proceeded on but slowly  the current being still so
rapid as to require the utmost exertions of us all to advance  and the
men are losing their strength fast in consequence of their constant
efforts  at half a mile we passed an island  and a mile and a quarter
further again entered a ridge of hills which now approach the river with
cliffs apparently sinking like those of yesterday  they are composed of
a solid limestone of a light lead colour when exposed to the air  though
when freshly broken it is of a deep blue  and of an excellent quality
and very fine grain  on these cliffs were numbers of the bighorn  at two
and a half miles we reached the centre of a bend towards the south
passing a small island  and at one mile and a quarter beyond this
reached about nine in the morning the mouth of a river seventy yards
wide  which falls in from the southeast  here the country suddenly opens
into extensive and beautiful meadows and plains  surrounded on every
side with distant and lofty mountains  captain lewis went up this stream
for about half a mile  and from the height of a limestone cliff could
observe its course about seven miles  and the three forks of the
missouri  of which this river is one  its extreme point bore s  65
degrees e  and during the seven miles it passes through a green
extensive meadow of fine grass dividing itself into several streams  the
largest passing near the ridge of hills on which he stood  on the right
side of the missouri a high  wide and extensive plain succeeds to this
low meadow which reaches the hills  in the meadow a large spring rises
about a quarter of a mile from this southeast fork  into which it
discharges itself on the right side about four hundred paces from where
he stood  between the southeast and middle forks a distant range of
snow topped mountains spread from east to south above the irregular
broken hills nearer to this spot  the middle and southwest forks unite
at half a mile above the entrance of the southeast fork  the extreme
point at which the former can be seen  bears s  15 degrees e  and at the
distance of fourteen miles  where it turns to the right round the point
of a high plain and disappears from the view  its low grounds are
several miles in width  forming a smooth and beautiful green meadow  and
like the southeast fork it divides itself into several streams  between
these two forks and near their junction with that from the southwest  is
a position admirably well calculated for a fort  it is a limestone rock
of an oblong form  rising from the plain perpendicularly to the height
of twenty five feet on three of its sides  the fourth towards the middle
fork being a gradual ascent and covered with a fine green sward  as is
also the top which is level and contains about two acres  an extensive
plain lies between the middle and southwest forks  the last of which
after watering a country like that of the other two branches  disappears
about twelve miles off  at a point bearing south 30 degrees west  it is
also more divided and serpentine in its course than the other two  and
possesses more timber in its meadows  this timber consists almost
exclusively of the narrow leafed cottonwood  with an inter mixture of
box alder and sweet willow  the underbrush being thick and like that of
the missouri lower down  a range of high mountains partially covered
with snow is seen at a considerable distance running from south to west 
and nearly all around us are broken ridges of country like that below 
through which those united streams appear to have forced their passage 
after observing the country captain lewis descended to breakfast  we
then left the mouth of the southeast fork  to which in honour of the
secretary of the treasury we called gallatin s river  and at the
distance of half a mile reached the confluence of the southwest and
middle branch of the missouri  here we found the letter from captain
clarke  and as we agreed with him that the direction of the southwest
fork gave it a decided preference over the others  we ascended that
branch of the river for a mile  and encamped in a level handsome plain
on the left  having advanced only seven miles  here we resolved to wait
the return of captain clarke  and in the meantime make the necessary
celestial observations  as this seems an essential point in the
geography of the western world  and also to recruit the men and air the
baggage  it was accordingly all unloaded and stowed away on shore  near
the three forks we saw many collections of the mud nests of the small
martin attached to the smooth faces of the limestone rock  where they
were sheltered by projections of the rock above it  and in the meadows
were numbers of the duck or mallard with their young  who are now nearly
grown  the hunters returned towards evening with six deer  three otter
and a muskrat  and had seen great numbers of antelopes  and much sign of
the beaver and elk 

during all last night captain clarke had a high fever and chills
accompanied with great pain  he however pursued his route eight miles to
the middle branch  where not finding any fresh indian track he came down
it and joined us about three o clock  very much exhausted with fatigue
and the violence of his fever  believing himself bilious he took a dose
of rush s pills  which we have always found sovereign in such cases  and
bathing the lower extremities in warm water 

we are now very anxious to see the snake indians  after advancing for
several hundred miles into this wild and mountainous country  we may
soon expect that the game will abandon us  with no information of the
route we may be unable to find a passage across the mountains when we
reach the head of the river  at least such a one as will lead us to the
columbia  and even were we so fortunate as to find a branch of that
river  the timber which we have hitherto seen in these mountains does
not promise us any fit to make canoes  so that our chief dependence is
on meeting some tribe from whom we may procure horses  our consolation
is  that this southwest branch can scarcely head with any other river
than the columbia  and that if any nation of indians can live in the
mountains we are able to endure as much as they  and have even better
means of procuring subsistence 




                              chapter xiii 

     the name of the missouri changed  as the river now divides itself
     into three forks  one of which is called after jefferson  the other
     madison  and the other after gallatin  their general character  the
     party ascend the jefferson branch  description of the river
     philosophy which enters into the jefferson  captain lewis and a
     small party go in advance in search of the shoshonees  description
     of the country   c  bordering on the river  captain lewis still
     preceding the main party in quest of the shoshonees  a singular
     accident which prevented captain clarke from following captain
     lewis s advice  and ascending the middle fork of the
     river  description of philanthropy river  another stream running
     into the jefferson  captain lewis and a small party having been
     unsuccessful in their first attempt  set off a second time in quest
     of the shoshonees 


sunday  july 28  captain clarke continued very unwell during the night 
but was somewhat relieved this morning  on examining the two streams it
became difficult to decide which was the larger or the real missouri 
they are each ninety yards wide and so perfectly similar in character
and appearance that they seem to have been formed in the same mould  we
were therefore induced to discontinue the name of missouri  and gave to
the southwest branch the name of jefferson in honour of the president of
the united states  and the projector of the enterprise  and called the
middle branch madison  after james madison secretary of state  these
two  as well as gallatin river  run with great velocity and throw out
large bodies of water  gallatin river is however the most rapid of the
three  and though not quite as deep  yet navigable for a considerable
distance  madison river though much less rapid than the gallatin  is
somewhat more rapid than the jefferson  the beds of all of them are
formed of smooth pebble and gravel  and the waters are perfectly
transparent  the timber in the neighbourhood would be sufficient for
the ordinary uses of an establishment  which  however  it would be
adviseable to build of brick  as the earth appears calculated for that
purpose  and along the shores are some bars of fine pure sand  the
greater part of the men  having yesterday put their deer skins in water 
were this day engaged in dressing them  for the purpose of making
clothing  the weather was very warm  the thermometer in the afternoon
was at 90 degrees above 0  and the musquitoes more than usually
inconvenient  we were  however  relieved from them by a high wind from
the southwest  which came on at four o clock  bringing a storm of
thunder and lightning  attended by refreshing showers  which continued
till after dark  in the evening the hunters returned with eight deer and
two elk  and the party who had been sent up the gallatin  reported that
after passing the point  where it escaped from captain  lewis s view
yesterday  it turned more towards the east  as far as they could discern
the opening of the mountains  formed by the valley which bordered it 
the low grounds were still wide but not so extensive as near its mouth 
and though the stream is rapid and much divided by islands  it is still
sufficiently deep for navigation with canoes  the low grounds  although
not more than eight or nine feet above the water  seem never to be
overflowed  except a part on the west side of the middle fork  which is
stony and seems occasionally inundated  are furnished with great
quantities of small fruit  such as currants and gooseberries  among the
last of which is a black species  which we observe not only in the
meadows but along the mountain rivulets  from the same root rise a
number of stems to the height of five or six feet  some of them
particularly branched and all reclining  the berry is attached by a long
peduncle to the stem  from which they hang of a smooth ovate form  as
large as the common garden gooseberry  and as black as jet  though the
pulp is of a bright crimson colour  it is extremely acid  the form of
the leaf resembles that of the common gooseberry  though larger  the
stem is covered with very sharp thorns or briars  the grass too is very
luxuriant and would yield fine hay in parcels of several acres  the
sand rushes will grow in many places as high as a man s breast  and as
thick as stalks of wheat  it would supply the best food during the
winter to cattle of any trading or military post 

sacajawea  our indian woman  informs us that we are encamped on the
precise spot where her countrymen  the snake indians  had their huts
five years ago  when the minnetarees of knife river first came in sight
of them  and from which they hastily retreated three miles up the
jefferson  and concealed themselves in the woods  the minnetarees 
however  pursued and attacked them  killed four men  as many women  and
a number of boys  and made prisoners of four other boys  and all the
females  of whom sacajawea was one  she does not  however  show any
distress at these recollections  nor any joy at the prospect of being
restored to her country  for she seems to possess the folly or the
philosophy of not suffering her feelings to extend beyond the anxiety of
having plenty to eat and a few trinkets to wear 

monday 29  this morning the hunters brought in some fat deer of the
long tailed red kind  which are quite as large as those of the united
states  and are  indeed  the only kind we have found at this place 
there are numbers of the sandhill cranes feeding in the meadows  we
caught a young one of the same colour as the red deer  which  though it
had nearly attained its full growth could not fly  it is very fierce and
strikes a severe blow with its beak  the kingfisher has become quite
common on this side of the falls  but we have seen none of the summer
duck since leaving that place  the mallard duck  which we saw for the
first time on the 20th instant  with their young  are now abundant 
though they do not breed on the missouri  below the mountains  the small
birds already described are also abundant in the plains  here too  are
great quantities of grasshoppers or crickets  and among other animals  a
large ant with a reddish brown body and legs  and a black head and
abdomen  who build little cones of gravel  ten or twelve inches high 
without a mixture of sticks  and but little earth  in the river we see a
great abundance of fish  but we cannot tempt them to bite by any thing
on our hooks  the whole party have been engaged in dressing skins  and
making them into moccasins and leggings  captain clarke s fever has
almost left him  but he still remains very languid and has a general
soreness in his limbs  the latitude of our camp  as the mean of two
observations of the meridian altitude of the sun s lower limb with
octant by back observation is n  45 degrees 24  8  5   

tuesday 30  captain clarke was this morning much restored  and 
therefore  having made all the observations necessary to fix the
longitude  we reloaded our canoes  and began to ascend jefferson river 
the river now becomes very crooked  and forms bends on each side  the
current too is rapid  and cut into a great number of channels  and
sometimes shoals  the beds of which consist of coarse gravel  the
islands are unusually numerous  on the right are high plains
occasionally forming cliffs of rocks and hills  while the left was an
extensive low ground and prairie intersected by a number of bayous or
channels falling into the river  captain lewis  who had walked through
it with chaboneau  his wife  and two invalids  joined us at dinner  a
few miles above our camp  here the indian woman said was the place where
she had been made prisoner  the men being too few to contend with the
minnetarees  mounted their horses  and fled as soon as the attack began 
the women and children dispersed  and sacajawea as she was crossing at a
shoal place  was overtaken in the middle of the river by her pursuers 
as we proceeded  the low grounds were covered with cottonwood and a
thick underbrush  and on both sides of the river  except where the high
hills prevented it  the ground was divided by bayous  which are dammed
up by the beaver  which are very numerous here  we made twelve and a
quarter miles  and encamped on the north side  captain lewis proceeded
after dinner  through an extensive low ground of timber and meadow land
intermixed  but the bayous were so obstructed by beaver dams  that in
order to avoid them he directed his course towards the high plain on the
right  this he gained with some difficulty  after wading up to his waist
through the mud and water of a number of beaver dams  when he desired to
rejoin the canoes he found the underbrush so thick  and the river so
crooked  that this  joined to the difficulty of passing the beaver dams 
induced him to go on and endeavour to intercept the river at some point
where it might be more collected into one channel and approach nearer to
the high plain  he arrived at the bank about sunset  having gone only
six miles in a direct course from the canoes  but he saw no traces of
the men  nor did he receive any answer to his shouts nor the firing of
his gun  it was now nearly dark  a duck lighted near him and he shot it 
he then went on the head of a small island where he found some
driftwood  which enabled him to cook his duck for supper  and he laid
down to sleep on some willow brush  the night was cool  but the
driftwood gave him a good fire  and he suffered no inconvenience except
from the mosquitoes 

wednesday 31  the next morning he waited till after seven o clock  when
he became uneasy lest we should have gone beyond his camp last evening
and determined to follow us  just as he had set out with this intention 
he saw one of the party in advance of the canoes  although our camp was
only two miles below him  in a straight line  we could not reach him
sooner  in consequence of the rapidity of the water and the circuitous
course of the river  we halted for breakfast  after which captain lewis
continued his route  at the distance of one mile from our encampment we
passed the principal entrance of a stream on the left  which rises in
the snowy mountains to the southwest  between jefferson and madison
rivers  and discharges itself by seven mouths  five below  and one three
miles above this  which is the largest  and about thirty yards wide  we
called it philosophy river  the water of it is abundant and perfectly
clear  and the bed like that of the jefferson consists of pebble and
gravel  there is some timber in the bottoms of the river  and vast
numbers of otter and beaver  which build on its smaller mouths and the
bayous of its neighbourhood  the jefferson continues as yesterday 
shoaly and rapid  but as the islands though numerous are small  it is
however more collected into one current than it was below  and is from
ninety to one hundred and twenty yards in width  the low ground has a
fertile soil of rich black loam  and contains a considerable quantity of
timber  with the bullrush and cattail flag very abundant in the moist
parts  while the drier situations are covered with fine grass  tansy 
thistles  onions  and flax  the uplands are barren  and without timber 
the soil is a light yellow clay intermixed with small smooth pebble and
gravel  and the only produce is the prickly pear  the sedge  and the
bearded grass  which is as dry and inflammable as tinder  as we
proceeded the low grounds became narrower  and the timber more scarce 
till at the distance of ten miles the high hills approach and overhang
the river on both sides  forming cliffs of a hard black granite  like
almost all those below the limestone cliffs at the three forks of the
missouri  they continue so for a mile and three quarters  where we came
to a point of rock on the right side  at which place the hills again
retire  and the valley widens to the distance of a mile and a half 
within the next five miles we passed four islands  and reached the foot
of a mountain in a bend of the river to the left  from this place we
went a mile and a quarter to the entrance of a small run discharging
itself on the left  and encamped on an island just above it  after
making seventeen and three quarter miles  we observe some pine on the
hills on both sides of our encampment  which are very lofty  the only
game which we have seen are one bighorn  a few antelopes  deer  and one
brown bear  which escaped from our pursuit  nothing was  however  killed
to day  nor have we had any fresh meat except one beaver for the last
two days  so that we are now reduced to an unusual situation  for we
have hitherto always had a great abundance of flesh 

thursday  august 1  we left our encampment early  and at the distance of
a mile  reached a point of rocks on the left side  where the river
passes though perpendicular cliffs  two and three quarter miles further
we halted for breakfast under a cedar tree in a bend to the right  here
as had been previously arranged  captain lewis left us  with sergeant
gass  chaboneau  and drewyer  intending to go on in advance in search of
the shoshonees  he began his route along the north side of the river
over a high range of mountains  as captain clarke who ascended them on
the 26th had observed from them a large valley spreading to the north of
west  and concluded that on leaving the mountain the river took that
direction  but when he reached that valley  captain lewis found it to be
the passage of a large creek falling just above the mountain into the
jefferson  which bears to the southwest  on discovering his error  he
bent his course towards that river  which he reached about two in the
afternoon  very much exhausted with heat and thirst  the mountains were
very bare of timber  and the route lay along the steep and narrow
hollows of the mountain  exposed to the mid day sun  without air  or
shade  or water  just as he arrived there a flock of elk passed  and
they killed two of them  on which they made their dinner  and left the
rest on the shore for the party in the canoes  after dinner they resumed
their march  and encamped on the north side of the river  after making
seventeen miles  in crossing the mountains captain lewis saw a flock of
the black or dark brown pheasant  of which he killed one  this bird is
one third larger than the common pheasant of the atlantic states  its
form is much the same  the male has not however the tufts of long black
feathers on the side of the neck so conspicuous in the atlantic
pheasant  and both sexes are booted nearly to the toes  the colour is a
uniform dark brown with a small mixture of yellow or yellowish brown
specks on some of the feathers  particularly those of the tail  though
the extremities of these are perfectly black for about an inch  the eye
is nearly black  and the iris has a small dash of yellowish brown  the
feathers of the tail are somewhat longer than those of our pheasant  but
the same in number  eighteen  and nearly equal in size  except that
those of the middle are somewhat the longest  their flesh is white and
agreeably flavoured 

he also saw among the scattered pine near the top of the mountain  a
blue bird about the size of a robin  but in action and form something
like a jay  it is constantly in motion  hopping from spray to spray  and
its note which is loud and frequent  is  as far as letters can represent
it  char ah  char ah  char ah 

after breakfast we proceeded on  at the distance of two and a quarter
miles the river enters a high mountain  which forms rugged cliffs of
nearly perpendicular rocks  these are of a black granite at the lower
part  and the upper consists of a light coloured freestone  they
continue from the point of rocks close to the river for nine miles 
which we passed before breakfast  during which the current is very
strong  at nine and a quarter miles we passed an island  and a rapid
fall with a fall of six feet  and reached the entrance of a large creek
on the left side  in passing this place the towline of one of the canoes
broke just at the shoot of the rapids  swung on the rocks and had nearly
upset  to the creek as well as the rapid we gave the name of frazier 
after robert  frazier one of the party  here the country opens into a
beautiful valley from six to eight miles in width  the river then
becomes crooked and crowded with islands  its lowgrounds wide and
fertile  but though covered with fine grass from nine inches to two
feet high  possesses but a small proportion of timber  and that consists
almost entirely of a few narrow leafed cottonwood distributed along the
verge of the river  the soil of the plain is tolerably fertile  and
consists of a black or dark yellow loam  it gradually ascends on each
side to the bases of two ranges of high mountains which lie parallel  to
the river  the tops of them are yet in part covered with snow  and while
in the valley we are nearly suffocated with heat during the day  and at
night the air is so cold that two blankets are not more than sufficient
covering  in passing through the hills we observed some large cedar
trees  and some juniper also  from frazier s creek we went three and
three quarter miles  and encamped on the left side  having come thirteen
miles  directly opposite our camp is a large creek which we call field s
creek  from reuben fields  one of our men  soon after we halted two of
the hunters went out and returned with five deer  which  with one
bighorn  we killed in coming through the mountain on which we dined  and
the elk left by captain lewis  we were again well supplied with fresh
meat  in the course of the day we saw a brown bear but were not able to
shoot him 

friday  august 2  captain lewis  who slept in the valley a few miles
above us  resumed his journey early  and after making five miles and
finding that the river still bore to the south  determined to cross it
in hopes of shortening the route  for the first time therefore he waded
across it  although there are probably many places above the falls where
it might be attempted with equal safety  the river was about ninety
yards wide  the current rapid  and about waist deep  the bottom formed
of smooth pebble with a small mixture of coarse gravel  he then
continued along the left bank of the river till sunset and encamped 
after travelling twenty four miles  he met no fresh tracks of indians 
throughout the valley are scattered the bones and excrement of the
buffaloe  of an old date  but there seems no hope of meeting the animals
themselves in the mountains  he saw an abundance of deer and antelope 
and many tracks of elk and bear  having killed two deer they feasted
sumptuously  with a desert of currants of different colours  two species
of red  others yellow  deep purple  and black  to these were added black
gooseberries and deep purple serviceberries  somewhat larger than ours 
from which it differs also in colour  size  and the superior excellence
of its flavour  in the low grounds of the river were many beaver dams
formed of willow brush  mud  and gravel  so closely interwoven that they
resist the water perfectly  some of them were five feet high and
overflowed several acres of land 

in the meantime we proceeded on slowly  the current being so strong as
to require the utmost exertions of the men to make any advance even with
the aid of the cord and pole  the wind being from the northwest  the
river is full of large and small islands  and the plain cut by great
numbers of bayous or channels  in which are multitudes of beaver  in the
course of the day we passed some villages of barking squirrels  we saw
several rattlesnakes in the plain  young ducks  both of the
duckon mallard and red headed fishing duck species  some geese  also the
black woodpecker  and a large herd of elk  the channel  current  banks 
and general appearance of the river  are like that of yesterday  at
fourteen and three quarter miles we reached a rapid creek or bayou about
thirty yards wide  to which we gave the name of birth creek  after
making seventeen miles we halted in a smooth plain in a bend towards the
left 

saturday  3  captain lewis continued his course along the river through
the valley  which continued much as it was yesterday  except that it now
widens to nearly twelve miles  the plains too are more broken and have
some scattered pine near the mountains  where they rise higher than
hitherto  in the level parts of the plains and the river bottoms there
is no timber except small cottonwood near the margin  and an undergrowth
of narrow leafed willow  small honeysuckle  rosebushes  currants 
serviceberry  and gooseberry  and a little of a small species of birch 
it is a finely indented oval of a small size and a deep green colour 
the stem is simple  ascending and branching  and seldom rises higher
than ten or twelve feet  the mountains continue high on each side of the
valley  but their only covering is a small species of pitch pine with a
short leaf  growing on the lower and middle regions  while for some
distance below the snowy tops there is neither timber nor herbage of any
kind  about eleven o clock drewyer killed a doe on which they
breakfasted  and after resting two hours continued till night  when they
reached the river near a low ground more extensive than usual  from the
appearance of the timber captain lewis supposed that the river forked
above him  and therefore encamped with an intention of examining it more
particularly in the morning  he had now made twenty three miles  the
latter part of which were for eight miles through a high plain covered
with prickly pears and bearded grass  which rendered the walking very
inconvenient  but even this was better than the river bottoms we crossed
in the evening  which  though apparently level  were formed into deep
holes as if they had been rooted up by hogs  and the holes were so
covered with thick grass that they were in danger of falling at every
step  some parts of these low grounds  however  contain turf or peat of
an excellent quality for many feet deep apparently  as well as the
mineral salts which we have already mentioned on the missouri  they saw
many deer  antelopes  ducks  geese  some beaver  and great traces of
their work  and the small birds and curlews as usual  the only fish
which they observed in this part of the river is the trout and a species
of white fish  with a remarkably long small mouth  which one of our men
recognize as the fish called in the eastern states the bottlenose 

on setting out with the canoes we found the river as usual much crowded
with islands  the current more rapid as well as shallower  so that in
many places they were obliged to man the canoes double  and drag them
over the stone and gravel of the channel  soon after we set off captain
clarke who was walking on shore observed a fresh track which he knew to
be that of an indian from the large toes being turned inwards  and on
following it found that it led to the point of a hill from which our
camp of last night could be seen  this circumstance strengthened the
belief that some indian had strayed thither  and had run off alarmed at
the sight of us  at two and a quarter miles  is a small creek in a bend
towards the right  which runs down from the mountains at a little
distance  we called it panther creek from an animal of that kind killed
by reuben fields at its mouth  it is precisely the same animal common to
the western parts of the united states  and measured seven and a half
feet from the nose to the extremity of the tail  six and three quarter
miles beyond this stream is another on the left formed by the drains
which convey the melted snows from a mountain near it  under which the
river passes  leaving the low grounds on the right side  and making
several bends in its course  on this stream are many large beaver dams 
one mile above it is a small run on the left  and after leaving which
begins a very bad rapid  where the bed of the river is formed of solid
rock  this we passed in the course of a mile  and encamped on the lower
point of an island  our journey had been only thirteen miles  but the
badness of the river made it very laborious  as the men were compelled
to be in the water during the greater part of the day  we saw only deer 
antelopes  and the common birds of the country 

saturday 4  this morning captain lewis proceeded early  and after going
southeast by east for four miles  reaching a bold running creek  twelve
yards wide  with clear cold water  furnished apparently by four drains
from the snowy mountains on the left  after passing this creek he
changed his direction to southeast  and leaving the valley in which he
had travelled for the last two days  entered another which bore east  at
the distance of three miles on this course he passed a handsome little
river  about thirty yards wide  which winds through the valley  the
current is not rapid nor the water very clear  but it affords a
considerable quantity of water  and appears as if it might be navigable
for some miles  the banks are low  and the bed formed of stone and
gravel  he now changed his route to southwest  and passing a high plain
which separates the vallies  returned to the more southern or that which
he had left  in passing this he found a river about forty five yards
wide  the water of which has a whitish blue tinge  with a gentle
current  and a gravelly bottom  this he waded and found it waist deep 
he then continued down it  till at the distance of three quarters of a
mile he saw the entrance of the small river he had just passed  as he
went on two miles lower down  he found the mouth of the creek he had
seen in the morning  proceeding further on three miles  he arrived at
the junction of this river  with another which rises from the southwest 
runs through the south valley about twelve miles before it forms its
junction  where it is fifty yards wide  we now found that our camp of
last night was about a mile and a half above the entrance of this large
river  on the right side  this is a bold  rapid  clear stream  but its
bed is so much obstructed by gravelly bars  and subdivided by islands 
that the navigation must be very insecure  if not impracticable  the
other or middle stream  has about two thirds its quantity of water  and
is more gentle  and may be safely navigated  as far as it could be
observed  its course was about southwest  but the opening of the valley
induced him to believe that farther above it turned more towards the
west  its water is more turbid and warmer than that of the other branch 
whence it may be presumed to have its sources at a greater distance in
the mountains  and to pass through a more open country  under this
impression he left a note recommending to captain clarke the middle
fork  and then continued his course along the right side of the other 
or more rapid branch  after travelling twenty three miles he near a
place where the river leaves the valley and enters the mountain  here he
encamped for the night  the country he passed is like that of the rest
of this valley  though there is more timber in this part on the rapid
fork than there has been on the river in the same extent since we
entered it  for on some parts of the valley the indians seem to have
destroyed a great proportion of the little timber there was  by setting
fire to the bottoms  he saw some antelopes  deer  cranes  geese and
ducks of the two species common to this country  though the summer duck
has ceased to appear  nor does it seem to be an inhabitant of this part
of the river 

we proceeded soon after sunrise  the first five miles we passed four
bends on the left  and several bayous on both sides  at eight o clock we
stopped to breakfast  and found the note captain lewis had written on
the 2d instant  during the next four miles  we passed three small bends
of the river to the right  two small islands  and two bayous on the same
side  here we reached a bluff on the left  our next course was six miles
to our encampment  in this course we met six circular bends on the
right  and several small bayous  and halted for the night in a low
ground of cottonwood on the right  our days journey  though only fifteen
miles in length  was very fatiguing  the river is still rapid and the
water though clear is very much obstructed by shoals or ripples at every
two or three hundred yards  at all these places we are obliged to drag
the canoes over the stones as there is not a sufficient depth of water
to float them  and in the other parts the current obliges us to have
recourse to the cord  but as the brushwood on the banks will not permit
us to walk on shore  we are under the necessity of wading through the
river as we drag the boats  this soon makes our feet tender  and
sometimes occasions severe falls over the slippery stones  and the men
by being constantly wet are becoming more feeble  in the course of the
day the hunters killed two deer  some geese and ducks  and the party
saw antelopes  cranes  beaver and otter 

monday 5  this morning chaboneau complained of being unable to march far
to day  and captain lewis therefore ordered him and serjeant gass to
pass the rapid river and proceed through the level low ground  to a
point of high timber on the middle fork  seven miles distant  and wait
his return  he then went along the north side of the rapid river about
four miles  where he waded it  and found it so rapid and shallow that it
would be impossible to navigate it  he continued along the left side for
a mile and a half  when the mountains came close on the river  and rise
to a considerable height with a partial covering of snow  from this
place the course of the river was to the east of north  after ascending
with some difficulty a high point of the mountain  he had a pleasing
view of the valley he had passed  and which continued for about twenty
miles further on each side of the middle fork  which then seemed to
enter the mountains  and was lost to the view  in that direction 
however  the hills which terminate the valley are much lower than those
along either of the other forks  particularly the rapid one  where they
continue rising in ranges above each other us far as the eye could
reach  the general course too of the middle fork  as well as that of the
gap which it forms on entering the mountains  is considerably to the
south of west  circumstances which gave a decided preference to this
branch as our future route  captain lewis now descended the mountain 
and crossed over to the middle fork  about five miles distant  and found
it still perfectly navigable  there is a very large and plain indian
road leading up it  but it has at present no tracks  except those of
horses which seem to have used it last spring  the river here made a
great bend to the southeast  and he therefore directed his course  as
well as he could  to the spot where he had directed chaboneau and gass
to repair  and struck the river about three miles above their camp  it
was now dark  and he  therefore  was obliged to make his way through the
thick brush of the pulpy leafed thorn and the prickly pear  for two
hours before he reached their camp  here he was fortunate enough to find
the remains of some meat  which was his only food during the march of
twenty five miles to day  he had seen no game of any sort except a few
antelopes who were very shy  the soil of the plains is a meagre clay  of
a light yellow colour  intermixed with a large proportion of gravel  and
producing nothing but twisted or bearded grass  sedge and prickly pears 
the drier parts of the low grounds are also more indifferent in point of
soil than those further down the river  and although they have but
little grass  are covered with southern wood  pulpy leafed thorn  and
prickly pears  while the moist parts are fertile  and supplied with fine
grass and sandrushes 

we passed within the first four and a quarter miles three small islands 
and the same number of bad rapids  at the distance of three quarters of
a mile is another rapid of difficult passage  three miles and three
quarters beyond this are the forks of the river  in reaching which we
had two islands and several bayous on different sides to pass  here we
had come nine miles and a quarter  the river was straighter and more
rapid than yesterday  the labour of the navigation proportionally
increased  and we therefore proceeded very slowly  as the feet of
several of the men were swollen  and all were languid with fatigue  we
arrived at the forks about four o clock  but unluckily captain lewis s
note had been left on a green pole which the beaver had cut down and
carried off with the note  an accident which deprived us of all
information as to the character of the two branches of the river 
observing therefore that the northwest fork was most in our direction 
and contained as much water as the other  we ascended it  we found it
extremely rapid  and its waters were scattered in such a manner  that
for a quarter of a mile we were forced to cut a passage through the
willowbrush that leaned over the little channels and united at the top 
after going up it for a mile we encamped on an island which had been
overflowed  and was still so wet that we were compelled to make beds of
brush to keep ourselves out of the mud  our provision consisted of two
deer which had been killed in the morning 

tuesday 6  we proceeded up the northwest fork  which we found still very
rapid  and divided by several islands  while the plains near it were
intersected by bayous  after passing with much difficulty over stones
and rapids  we reached a bluff on the right  at the distance of nine
miles  our general course south 30 degrees west  and halted for
breakfast  here we were joined by drewyer  who informed us of the state
of the two rivers and of captain lewis s note  and we immediately began
to descend the river in order to take the other branch  on going down
one of the canoes upset  and two others filled with water  by which all
the baggage was wet  and several articles irrecoverably lost  as one of
them swung round in a rapid current  whitehouse was thrown out of her 
and whilst down the canoe passed over him  and had the water been two
inches shallower would have crushed him to pieces  but he escaped with a
severe bruise of his leg  in order to repair these misfortunes we
hastened to the forks  where we were joined by captain lewis  and then
passed over to the left side opposite to the entrance of the rapid fork 
and encamped on a large gravelly bar  near which there was plenty of
wood  here we opened and exposed to dry all the articles which had
suffered from the water  none of them were completely spoiled except a
small keg of powder  the rest of the powder  which was distributed in
the different canoes was quite safe  although it had been under the
water upwards of an hour  the air is indeed so pure and dry that any
wood work immediately shrinks  unless it is kept filled with water  but
we had planned our powder in small canisters of lead  each containing
powder enough for the canister when melted into bullets  and smeared
with cork and wax  which answered our purpose perfectly 

captain lewis had risen very early  and having nothing to eat  sent out
drewyer to the woodland on the left in search of a deer  and directed
sergeant gass to keep along the middle branch to meet us if we were
ascending it  he then set off with chaboneau towards the forks  but five
miles above them  hearing us on the left  struck the river as we were
descending  and came on board at the forks 

in the evening we killed three deer and four elk  which furnished us
once more with a plentiful supply of meat  shannon  the same man who was
lost before for fifteen days  was sent out this morning to hunt  up the
northwest fork  when we decided on returning  drewyer was directed to go
in quest of him  but he returned with information that he had gone
several miles up the river without being able to find shannon  we now
had the trumpet sounded  and fired several guns  but he did not return 
and we fear he is again lost 

wednesday 7  we remained here this morning for the purpose of making
some celestial observations  and also in order to refresh the men  and
complete the drying of the baggage  we obtained a meridian altitude
which gave the latitude of our camp at north 45 degrees 2  48  8    we
were now completely satisfied that the middle branch was the most
navigable  and the true continuation of the jefferson  the northwest
fork seems to be the drain of the melting snows of the mountains  its
course cannot be so long as the other branch  and although it contains
now as great a quantity of water  yet the water has obviously overflowed
the old bed  and spread into channels which leave the low grounds
covered with young grass  resembling that of the adjoining lands  which
are not inundated  whence we readily infer that the supply is more
precarious than that of the other branch  the waters of which though
more gentle are more constant  this northwest fork we called wisdom
river 

as soon as the baggage was dried  it was reloaded on board the boats 
but we now found it so much diminished  that we would we able to proceed
with one canoe less  we therefore hauled up the superfluous one into a
thicket of brush where we secured her against being swept away by the
high tide  at one o clock all set out  except captain lewis who remained
till the evening in order to complete the observation of equal
altitudes  we passed several bends of the river both to the right and
left  as well as a number of bayous on both sides  and made seven miles
by water  though the distance by land is only three  we then encamped on
a creek which rises in a high mountain to the northeast  and after
passing through an open plain for several miles  discharges itself on
the left  where it is a bold running stream twelve yards wide  we called
it turf creek  from the number of bogs and the quantity of turf on its
waters  in the course of the afternoon there fell a shower of rain
attended with thunder and lightning  which lasted about forty minutes 
and the weather remained so cloudy all night that we were unable to take
any lunar observations  uneasy about shannon  we sent r  fields in
search of him this morning  but we have as yet no intelligence of either
of them  our only game to day was one deer 

thursday 8  there was a heavy dew this morning  having left one of the
canoes  there are now more men to spare for the chace  and four were
sent out at an early hour  after which we proceeded  we made five miles
by water along two islands and several bayous  but as the river formed
seven different bends towards the left  the distance by land was only
two miles south of our encampment  at the end of that course we reached
the upper principal entrance of a stream which we called philanthropy
river  this river empties itself into the jefferson on the southeast
side  by two channels a short distance from each other  from its size
and its southeastern course  we presume that it rises in the rocky
mountains near the sources of the madison  it is thirty yards wide at
its entrance  has a very gentle current  and is navigable for some
distance  one mile above this river we passed an island  a second at the
distance of six miles further  during which the river makes a
considerable bend to the east  reuben fields returned about noon with
information that he had gone up wisdom river till its entrance into the
mountains  but could find nothing of shannon  we made seven miles beyond
the last island  and after passing some small bayous  encamped under a
few high trees on the left  at the distance of fourteen miles above
philanthropy river by water  though only six by land  the river has in
fact become so very crooked that although by means of the pole which we
now use constantly we make a considerable distance  yet being obliged to
follow its windings  at the end of the day  we find ourselves very
little advanced on our general course  it forms itself into small
circular bends  which are so numerous that within the last fourteen
miles we passed thirty five of them  all inclining towards the right  it
is however much more gentle and deep than below wisdom river  and its
general width is from thirty five to forty five yards  the general
appearance of the surrounding country is that of a valley five or six
miles wide  enclosed between two high mountains  the bottom is rich 
with some small timber on the islands and along the river  which
consists rather of underbrush  and a few cottonwood  birch  and
willow trees  the high grounds have some scattered pine  which just
relieve the general nakedness of the hills and the plain  where there is
nothing except grass  along the bottoms we saw to day a considerable
quantity of the buffaloe clover  the sunflower  flax  green sward 
thistle and several species of rye grass  some of which rise to the
height of three or four feet  there is also a grass with a soft smooth
leaf which rises about three feet high  and bears its seed very much
like the timothy  but it does not grow luxuriantly nor would it
apparently answer so well in our meadows as that plant  we preserved
some of its seed  which are now ripe  in order to make the experiment 
our game consisted of deer and antelope  and we saw a number of geese
and ducks just beginning to fly  and some cranes  among the inferior
animals we have an abundance of the large biting or hare fly  of which
there are two species  one black  the other smaller and brown  except
the head which is green  the green or blowing flies unite with them in
swarms to attack us  and seem to have relieved the eye gnats who have
now disappeared  the musquitoes too are in large quantities  but not so
troublesome as they were below  through the valley are scattered bogs 
and some very good turf  the earth of which the mud is composed is of a
white or bluish white colour  and seems to be argilaceous  on all the
three rivers  but particularly on the philanthropy  are immense
quantities of beaver  otter and muskrat  at our camp there was an
abundance of rosebushes and briars  but so little timber that we were
obliged to use willow brush for fuel  the night was again cloudy which
prevented the lunar observations 

on our right is the point of a high plain  which our indian woman
recognizes as the place called the beaver s head from a supposed
resemblance to that object  this she says is not far from the summer
retreat of her countrymen  which is on a river beyond the mountains  and
running to the west  she is therefore certain that we shall meet them
either on this river  or on that immediately west of its source  which
judging from its present size  cannot be far distant  persuaded of the
absolute necessity of procuring horses to cross the mountains  it was
determined that one of us should proceed in the morning to the head of
the river  and penetrate the mountains till he found the shoshonees or
some other nation who could assist us in transporting our baggage  the
greater part of which we shall be compelled to leave without the aid of
horses 

friday 9  the morning was fair and fine  we set off early  and proceeded
on very well  though there were more rapids in the river than
yesterday  at eight o clock we halted for breakfast  part of which
consisted of two fine geese killed before we stopped  here we were
joined by shannon for whose safety we had been so uneasy  the day on
which he left us on his way up wisdom river  after hunting for some time
and not seeing the party arrive  he returned to the place where he had
left us  not finding us there he supposed we had passed him  and he
therefore marched up the river during all the next day  when he was
convinced that we had not gone on  as the river was no longer navigable 
he now followed the course of the river down to the forks  and then took
the branch which we are pursuing  during the three days of his absence 
he had been much wearied with his march  but had lived plentifully  and
brought the skins of three deer  as far as he had ascended wisdom river
it kept its course obliquely down towards the jefferson  immediately
after breakfast  captain lewis took drewyer  shields and m neal  and
slinging their knapsacks they set out with a resolution to meet some
nation of indians before they returned  however long they might be
separated from the party  he directed his course across the low ground
to the plain on the right  leaving the beaver s head about two miles to
the left  after walking eight miles to the river  which they waded  they
went on to a commanding point from which he saw the place at which it
enters the mountain  but as the distance would not permit his reaching
it this evening  he descended towards the river  and after travelling
eight miles further  encamped for the evening some miles below the
mountain  they passed before reaching their camp a handsome little
stream formed by some large springs which rise in the wide bottom on the
left side of the river  in their way they killed two antelopes  and took
with them enough of the meat for their supper and breakfast the next
morning 

in the meantime we proceeded  and in the course of eleven miles from
our last encampment passed two small islands  sixteen short round bends
in the river  and halted in a bend towards the right where we dined  the
river increases in rapidity as we advance  and is so crooked that the
eleven miles  which have cost us so much labour  only bring us four
miles in a direct line  the weather became overcast towards evening  and
we experienced a slight shower attended with thunder and lightning  the
three hunters who were sent out killed only two antelopes  game of every
kind being scarce 

saturday  10  captain lewis continued his route at an early hour through
the wide bottom along the left bank of the river  at about five miles he
passed a large creek  and then fell into an indian road leading towards
the point where the river entered the mountain  this he followed till he
reached a high perpendicular cliff of rocks where the river makes its
passage through the hills  and which he called the rattlesnake cliff 
from the number of that animal which he saw there  here he kindled a
fire and waited the return of drewyer  who had been sent out on the way
to kill a deer  he came back about noon with the skin of three deer and
the flesh of one of the best of them  after a hasty dinner they returned
to the indian road which they had left for a short distance to see the
cliff  it led them sometimes over the hills  sometimes in the narrow
bottoms of the river  till at the distance of fifteen miles from the
rattlesnake cliffs they reached a handsome open and level valley  where
the river divided into two nearly equal branches  the mountains over
which they passed were not very high  but are rugged and continue close
to the river side  the river  which before it enters the mountain was
rapid  rocky  very crooked  much divided by islands  and shallow  now
becomes more direct in its course as it is hemmed in by the hills  and
has not so many bends nor islands  but becomes more rapid and rocky 
and continues as shallow  on examining the two branches of the river it
was evident that neither of them was navigable further  the road forked
with the river  and captain lewis therefore sent a man up each of them
for a short distance  in order that by comparing their respective
information he might be able to take that which seemed to have been most
used this spring  from their account he resolved to choose that which
led along the southwest branch of the river which was rather the smaller
of the two  he accordingly wrote a note to captain clarke informing him
of the route  and recommending his staying with the party at the forks
till he should return  this he fixed on a dry willow pole at the forks
of the river  and then proceeded up the southwest branch  but after
going a mile and a half the road became scarcely distinguishable  and
the tracks of the horses which he had followed along the jefferson were
no longer seen  captain lewis therefore returned to examine the other
road himself  and found that the horses had in fact passed along the
western or right fork which had the additional recommendation of being
larger than the other 

this road he concluded to take  and therefore sent back drewyer to the
forks with a second letter to captain clarke apprising him of the
change  and then proceeded on  the valley of the west fork through which
he now passed  bears a little to the north of west  and is confined
within the space of about a mile in width  by rough mountains and steep
cliffs of rock  at the distance of four and a half miles it opens into a
beautiful and extensive plain about ten miles long and five or six in
width  this is surrounded on all sides by higher rolling or waving
country  intersected by several little rivulets from the mountains  each
bordered by its wide meadows  the whole prospect is bounded by these
mountains  which nearly surround it  so as to form a beautiful cove
about sixteen or eighteen miles in diameter  on entering this cove the
river bends to the northwest  and bathes the foot of the hills to the
right  at this place they halted for the night on the right side of the
river  and having lighted a fire of dry willow brush  the only fuel
which the country affords  supped on a deer  they had travelled to day
thirty miles by estimate  that is ten to the rattlesnake cliff  fifteen
to the forks of jefferson river  and five to their encampment  in this
cove some parts of the low grounds are tolerably fertile  but much the
greater proportion is covered with prickly pear  sedge  twisted grass 
the pulpy leafed thorn  southern wood  and wild sage  and like the
uplands have a very inferior soil  these last have little more than the
prickly pear and the twisted or bearded grass  nor are there in the
whole cove more than three or four cottonwood trees  and those are
small  at the apparent extremity of the bottom above  and about ten
miles to the westward  are two perpendicular cliffs rising to a
considerable height on each side of the river  and at this distance seem
like a gate  in the meantime we proceeded at sunrise  and found the
river not so rapid as yesterday  though more narrow and still very
crooked  and so shallow that we were obliged to drag the canoes over
many ripples in the course of the day  at six and a half miles we had
passed eight bends on the north  and two small bayous on the left  and
came to what the indians call the beaver s head  a steep rocky cliff
about one hundred and fifty feet high  near the right side of the river 
opposite to this at three hundred yards from the water is a low cliff
about fifty feet in height  which forms the extremity of a spur of the
mountain about four miles distant on the left  at four o clock we were
overtaken by a heavy shower of rain  attended with thunder  lightning
and hail  the party were defended from the hail by covering themselves
with willow bushes  but they got completely wet  and in this situation 
as soon as the rain ceased  continued till we encamped  this we did at a
low bluff on the left  after passing in the course of six and a half
miles  four islands and eighteen bends on the right  and a low bluff
and several bayous on the same side  we had now come thirteen miles  yet
were only four on our route towards the mountains  the game seems to be
declining  for our hunters procured only a single deer  though we found
another for us that had been killed three days before by one of the
hunters during an excursion  and left for us on the river 




                               chapter xiv 

     captain lewis proceeds before the main body in search of the
     shoshonees  his ill success on the first interview  the party with
     captain lewis at length discover the source of the
     missouri  captain clarke with the main body still employed in
     ascending the missouri or jefferson river  captain lewis s second
     interview with the shoshonees attended with success  the
     interesting ceremonies of his first introduction to the natives 
     detailed at large  their hospitality  their mode of hunting the
     antelope  the difficulties encountered by captain clarke and the
     main body in ascending the river  the suspicions entertained of
     captain lewis by the shoshonees  and his mode of allaying them  the
     ravenous appetites of the savages illustrated by a singular
     adventure  the indians still jealous  and the great pains taken by
     captain lewis to preserve their confidence  captain clarke arrives
     with the main body exhausted by the difficulties which they
     underwent 


sunday  august 11  captain lewis again proceeded on early  but had the
mortification to find that the track which he followed yesterday soon
disappeared  he determined therefore to go on to the narrow gate or pass
of the river which he had seen from the camp  in hopes of being able to
recover the indian path  for this purpose he waded across the river 
which was now about twelve yards wide  and barred in several places by
the dams of the beaver  and then went straight forward to the pass 
sending one man along the river to his left  and another on the right 
with orders to search for the road  and if they found it to let him know
by raising a hat on the muzzle of their guns  in this order they went
along for about five miles  when captain lewis perceived with the
greatest delight a man on horseback at the distance of two miles coming
down the plain towards them  on examining him with the glass  captain
lewis saw that he was of a different nation from any indians we had
hitherto met  he was armed with a bow and a quiver of arrows  mounted
on an elegant horse without a saddle  and a small string attached to the
under jaw answered as a bridle  convinced that he was a shoshonee  and
knowing how much of our success depended on the friendly offices of that
nation  captain lewis was full of anxiety to approach without alarming
him  and endeavour to convince him that he was a white man  he
therefore  proceeded on towards the indian at his usual pace  when they
were within a mile of each other the indian suddenly stopt  captain
lewis immediately followed his example  took his blanket from his
knapsack  and holding it with both hands at the two corners  threw it
above his head and unfolded it as he brought it to the ground as if in
the act of spreading it  this signal which originates in the practice of
spreading a robe or a skin  as a seat for guests to whom they wish to
show a distinguished kindness  is the universal sign of friendship among
the indians on the missouri and the rocky mountains  as usual  captain
lewis repeated this signal three times  still the indian kept his
position  and looked with an air of suspicion on drewyer and shields who
were now advancing on each side  captain lewis was afraid to make any
signal for them to halt  lest he should increase the suspicions of the
indian  who began to be uneasy  and they too distant to hear his voice 
he  therefore  took from his pack some beads  a looking glass and a few
trinkets  which he had brought for the purpose  and leaving his gun
advanced unarmed towards the indian  he remained in the same position
till captain lewis came within two hundred yards of him  when he turned
his horse  and began to move off slowly  captain lewis then called out
to him  in as loud a voice as he could  repeating the word  tabba bone 
which in the shoshonee language means white man  but looking over his
shoulder the indian kept his eyes on drewyer and shields  who were still
advancing  without recollecting the impropriety of doing so at such a
moment  till captain lewis made a signal to them to halt  this drewyer
obeyed  but shields did not observe it  and still went forward  seeing
drewyer halt the indian turned his horse about as if to wait for captain
lewis who now reached within one hundred and fifty paces  repeating the
word tabba bone  and holding up the trinkets in his hand  at the same
time stripping up the sleeve of his shirt to show the colour of his
skin  the indian suffered him to advance within one hundred paces  then
suddenly turned his horse  and giving him the whip  leaped across the
creek  and disappeared in an instant among the willow bushes  with him
vanished all the hopes which the sight of him had inspired of a friendly
introduction to his countrymen  though sadly disappointed by the
imprudence of his two men  captain lewis determined to make the incident
of some use  and therefore calling the men to him they all set off after
the track of the horse  which they hoped might lead them to the camp of
the indian who had fled  or if he had given the alarm to any small
party  their track might conduct them to the body of the nation  they
now fixed a small flag of the united states on a pole  which was carried
by one of the men as a signal of their friendly intentions  should the
indians observe them as they were advancing  the route lay across an
island formed by a nearly equal division of the creek in the bottom 
after reaching the open grounds on the right side of the creek  the
track turned towards some high hills about three miles distant 
presuming that the indian camp might be among these hills  and that by
advancing hastily he might be seen and alarm them  captain lewis sought
an elevated situation near the creek  had a fire made of willow brush 
and took breakfast  at the same time he prepared a small assortment of
beads  trinkets  awls  some paint and a looking glass  and placed them
on a pole near the fire  in order that if the indians returned they
might discover that the party were white men and friends  whilst making
these preparations a very heavy shower of rain and hail came on  and
wet them to the skin  in about twenty minutes it was over  and captain
lewis then renewed his pursuit  but as the rain had made the grass which
the horse had trodden down rise again  his track could with difficulty
be distinguished  as they went along they passed several places where
the indians seemed to have been digging roots to day  and saw the fresh
track of eight or ten horses  but they had been wandering about in so
confused a manner that he could not discern any particular path  and at
last  after pursuing it about four miles along the valley to the left
under the foot of the hills  he lost the track of the fugitive indian 
near the head of the valley they had passed a large bog covered with
moss and tall grass  among which were several springs of pure cold
water  they now turned a little to the left along the foot of the high
hills  and reached a small creek where they encamped for the night 
having made about twenty miles  though not more than ten in a direct
line from their camp of last evening 

the morning being rainy and wet we did not set out with the canoes till
after an early breakfast  during the first three miles we passed three
small islands  six bayous on different sides of the river  and the same
number of bends towards the right  here we reached the lower point of a
large island which we called three thousand mile island  on account of
its being at that distance from the mouth of the missouri  it is three
miles and a half in length  and as we coasted along it we passed several
small bends of the river towards the left  and two bayous on the same
side  after leaving the upper point of three thousand mile island  we
followed the main channel on the left side  which led us by three small
islands and several small bayous  and fifteen bends towards the right 
then at the distance of seven miles and a half we encamped on the upper
end of a large island near the right  the river was shallow and rapid 
so that we were obliged to be in the water during a great part of the
day  dragging the canoes over the shoals and ripples  its course too was
so crooked  that notwithstanding we had made fourteen miles by water  we
were only five miles from our encampment of last night  the country
consists of a low ground on the river about five miles wide  and
succeeded on both sides by plains of the same extent which reach to the
base of the mountains  these low grounds are very much intersected by
bayous  and in those on the left side is a large proportion of bog
covered with tall grass  which would yield a fine turf  there are very
few trees  and those small narrow leafed cottonwood  the principal
growth being the narrow leafed willow  and currant bushes  among which
were some bunches of privy near the river  we saw a number of geese 
ducks  beaver  otter  deer and antelopes  of all which one beaver was
killed with a pole from the boat  three otters with a tomahawk  and the
hunters brought in three deer and an antelope 

monday  12  this morning as soon as it was light captain lewis sent
drewyer to reconnoitre if possible the route of the indians  in about an
hour and a half he returned  after following the tracks of the horse
which we had lost yesterday to the mountains  where they ascended and
were no longer visible  captain lewis now decided on making the circuit
along the foot of the mountains which formed the cove  expecting by that
means to find a road across them  and accordingly sent drewyer on one
side  and shields on the other  in this way they crossed four small
rivulets near each other  on which were some bowers or conical lodges of
willow brush  which seemed to have been made recently  from the manner
in which the ground in the neighbourhood was torn up the indians
appeared to have been gathering roots  but captain lewis could not
discover what particular plant they were searching for  nor could he
find any fresh track  till at the distance of four miles from his camp
he met a large plain indian road which came into the cove from the
northeast  and wound along the foot of the mountains to the southwest 
approaching obliquely the main stream he had left yesterday  down this
road he now went towards the southwest  at the distance of five miles it
crossed a large run or creek  which is a principal branch of the main
stream into which it falls  just above the high cliffs or gates observed
yesterday  and which they now saw below them  here they halted and
breakfasted on the last of the deer  keeping a small piece of pork in
reserve against accident  they then continued through the low bottom
along the main stream near the foot of the mountains on their right  for
the first five miles the valley continues towards the southwest from two
to three miles in width  then the main stream  which had received two
small branches from the left in the valley  turns abruptly to the west
through a narrow bottom between the mountains  the road was still plain 
and as it led them directly on towards the mountain the stream gradually
became smaller  till after going two miles it had so greatly diminished
in width that one of the men in a fit of enthusiasm  with one foot on
each side of the river  thanked god that he had lived to bestride the
missouri  as they went along their hopes of soon seeing the waters of
the columbia arose almost to painful anxiety  when after four miles from
the last abrupt turn of the river  they reached a small gap formed by
the high mountains which recede on each side  leaving room for the
indian road  from the foot of one of the lowest of these mountains 
which rises with a gentle ascent of about half a mile  issues the
remotest water of the missouri  they had now reached the hidden sources
of that river  which had never yet been seen by civilized man  and as
they quenched their thirst at the chaste and icy fountain  as they sat
down by the brink of that little rivulet  which yielded its distant and
modest tribute to the parent ocean  they felt themselves rewarded for
all their labours and all their difficulties  they left reluctantly
this interesting spot  and pursuing the indian road through the interval
of the hills  arrived at the top of a ridge  from which they saw high
mountains partially covered with snow still to the west of them  the
ridge on which they stood formed the dividing line between the waters of
the atlantic and pacific oceans  they followed a descent much steeper
than that on the eastern side  and at the distance of three quarters of
a mile reached a handsome bold creek of cold clear water running to the
westward  they stopped to taste for the first time the waters of the
columbia  and after a few minutes followed the road across steep hills
and low hollows  till they reached a spring on the side of a mountain 
here they found a sufficient quantity of dry willow brush for fuel  and
therefore halted for the night  and having killed nothing in the course
of the day supped on their last piece of pork  and trusted to fortune
for some other food to mix with a little flour and parched meal  which
was all that now remained of their provisions  before reaching the
fountain of the missouri they saw several large hawks nearly black  and
some of the heath cocks  these last have a long pointed tail  and are of
a uniform dark brown colour  much larger than the common dunghill fowl 
and similar in habits and the mode of flying to the grouse or prairie
hen  drewyer also wounded at the distance of one hundred and thirty
yards an animal which we had not yet seen  but which after falling
recovered itself and escaped  it seemed to be of the fox kind  rather
larger than the small wolf of the plains  and with a skin in which
black  reddish brown  and yellow  were curiously intermixed  on the
creek of the columbia they found a species of currant which does not
grow as high as that of the missouri  though it is more branching  and
its leaf  the under disk of which is covered with a hairy pubescence  is
twice as large  the fruit is of the ordinary size and shape of the
currant  and supported in the usual manner  but is of a deep purple
colour  acid  and of a very inferior flavour 

we proceeded on in the boats  but as the river was very shallow and
rapid  the navigation is extremely difficult  and the men who are almost
constantly in the water are getting feeble and sore  and so much wore
down by fatigue that they are very anxious to commence travelling by
land  we went along the main channel which is on the right side  and
after passing nine bends in that direction  three islands and a number
of bayous  reached at the distance of five and a half miles the upper
point of a large island  at noon there was a storm of thunder which
continued about half an hour  after which we proceeded  but as it was
necessary to drag the canoes over the shoals and rapids  made but little
progress  on leaving the island we passed a number of short bends 
several bayous  and one run of water on the right side  and having gone
by four small and two large islands  encamped on a smooth plain to the
left near a few cottonwood trees  our journey by water was just twelve
miles  and four in a direct line  the hunters supplied us with three
deer and a fawn 

tuesday 13  very early in the morning captain lewis resumed the indian
road  which led him in a western direction  through an open broken
country  on the left was a deep valley at the foot of a high range of
mountains running from southeast to northwest  with their sides better
clad with timber than the hills to which we have been for some time
accustomed  and their tops covered in part with snow  at five miles
distance  after following the long descent of another valley  he reached
a creek about ten yards wide  and on rising the hill beyond it had a
view of a handsome little valley on the left  about a mile in width 
through which they judged  from the appearance of the timber  that some
stream of water most probably passed  on the creek they had just left
were some bushes of the white maple  the sumach of the small species
with the winged rib  and a species of honeysuckle  resembling in its
general appearance and the shape of its leaf the small honeysuckle of
the missouri  except that it is rather larger  and bears a globular
berry  about the size of a garden pea  of a white colour  and formed of
a soft white mucilaginous substance  in which are several small brown
seeds irregularly scattered without any cell  and enveloped in a smooth
thin pellicle 

they proceeded along a waving plain parallel to this valley for about
four miles  when they discovered two women  a man and some dogs on an
eminence at the distance of a mile before them  the strangers first
viewed them apparently with much attention for a few minutes  and then
two of them sat down as if to await captain lewis s arrival  he went on
till he reached within about half a mile  then ordered his party to
stop  put down his knapsack and rifle  and unfurling the flag advanced
alone towards the indians  the females soon retreated behind the hill 
but the man remained till captain lewis came within a hundred yards from
him  when he too went off  though captain lewis called out tabba bone 
loud enough to be heard distinctly  he hastened to the top of the hill 
but they had all disappeared  the dogs however were less shy  and came
close to him  he therefore thought of tying a handkerchief with some
beads round their necks  and then let them loose to convince the
fugitives of his friendly disposition  but they would not suffer him to
take hold of them  and soon left him  he now made a signal to the men 
who joined him  and then all followed the track of the indians  which
led along a continuation of the same road they had been already
travelling  it was dusty and seemed to have been much used lately both
by foot passengers and horsemen  they had not gone along it more than a
mile when on a sudden they saw three female indians  from whom they had
been concealed by the deep ravines which intersected the road  till they
were now within thirty paces of each other  one of them a young woman
immediately took to flight  the other two  an elderly woman and a
little girl  seeing we were too near for them to escape  sat on the
ground  and holding down their heads seemed as if reconciled to the
death which they supposed awaited them  the same habit of holding down
the head and inviting the enemy to strike  when all chance of escape is
gone  is preserved in egypt to this day  captain lewis instantly put
down his rifle  and advancing towards them  took the woman by the hand 
raised her up  and repeated the word tabba bone  at the sane time
stripping up his shirt sleeve to prove that he was a white man  for his
hands and face had become by constant exposure quite as dark as their
own  she appeared immediately relieved from her alarm  and drewyer and
shields now coming up  captain lewis gave them some beads  a few awls 
pewter mirrors  and a little paint  and told drewyer to request the
woman to recall her companion who had escaped to some distance  and by
alarming the indians might cause them to attack him without any time for
explanation  she did as she was desired  and the young woman returned
almost out of breath  captain lewis gave her an equal portion of
trinkets  and painted the tawny cheeks of all three of them with
vermillion  a ceremony which among the shoshonees is emblematic of
peace  after they had become composed  he informed them by signs of his
wish to go to their camp in order to see their chiefs and warriors  they
readily obeyed  and conducted the party along the same road down the
river  in this way they marched two miles  when they met a troop of
nearly sixty warriors mounted on excellent horses riding at full speed
towards them  as they advanced captain lewis put down his gun  and went
with the flag about fifty paces in advance  the chief who with two men
were riding in front of the main body  spoke to the women  who now
explained that the party was composed of white men  and showed
exultingly the presents they had received  the three men immediately
leaped from their horses  came up to captain lewis and embraced him with
great cordiality  putting their left arm over his right shoulder and
clasping his back  applying at the same time their left cheek to his 
and frequently vociferating ah hi e  ah hi e   i am much pleased  i am
much rejoiced   the whole body of warriors now came forward  and our men
received the caresses  and no small share of the grease and paint of
their new friends  after this fraternal embrace  of which the motive was
much more agreeable than the manner  captain lewis lighted a pipe and
offered it to the indians who had now seated themselves in a circle
around the party  but before they would receive this mark of friendship
they pulled off their moccasins  a custom as we afterwards learnt  which
indicates the sacred sincerity of their professions when they smoke with
a stranger  and which imprecates on themselves the misery of going
barefoot forever if they are faithless to their words  a penalty by no
means light to those who rove over the thorny plains of their country 
it is not unworthy to remark the analogy which some of the customs of
those wild children of the wilderness bear to those recorded in holy
writ  moses is admonished to pull off his shoes  for the place on which
he stood was holy ground  why this was enjoined as an act of peculiar
reverence  whether it was from the circumstance that in the arid region
in which the patriarch then resided  it was deemed a test of the
sincerity of devotion to walk upon the burning sands barefooted  in some
measure analogous to the pains inflicted by the prickly pear  does not
appear  after smoking a few pipes  some trifling presents were
distributed amongst them  with which they seemed very much pleased 
particularly with the blue beads and the vermillion  captain lewis then
informed the chief that the object of his visit was friendly  and should
be explained as soon as he reached their camp  but that in the meantime
as the sun was oppressive  and no water near  he wished to go there as
soon as possible  they now put on their moccasins  and their chief 
whose name was cameahwait  made a short speech to the warriors  captain
lewis then gave him the flag  which he informed him was among white men
the emblem of peace  and now that he had received it was to be in future
the bond of union between them  the chief then moved on  our party
followed him  and the rest of the warriors in a squadron  brought up the
rear  after marching a mile they were halted by the chief  who made a
second harangue  on which six or eight young men rode forward to their
camp  and no further regularity was observed in the order of march  at
the distance of four miles from where they had first met  they reached
the indian camp  which was in a handsome level meadow on the bank of the
river  here they were introduced into an old leathern lodge which the
young men who had been sent from the party had fitted up for their
reception  after being seated on green boughs and antelope skins  one of
the warriors pulled up the grass in the centre of the lodge so as to
form a vacant circle of two feet diameter  in which he kindled a fire 
the chief then produced his pipe and tobacco  the warriors all pulled
off their moccasins  and our party was requested to take off their own 
this being done  the chief lighted his pipe at the fire within the magic
circle  and then retreating from it began a speech several minutes long 
at the end of which he pointed the stem towards the four cardinal points
of the heavens  beginning with the east and concluding with the north 
after this ceremony he presented the stem in the same way to captain
lewis  who supposing it an invitation to smoke  put out his hand to
receive the pipe  but the chief drew it back  and continued to repeat
the same offer three times  after which he pointed the stem first to the
heavens  then to the centre of the little circle  took three whiffs
himself  and presented it again to captain lewis  finding that this last
offer was in good earnest  he smoked a little  the pipe was then held to
each of the white men  and after they had taken a few whiffs was given
to the warriors  this pipe was made of a dense transparent green stone 
very highly polished  about two and an half inches long  and of an oval
figure  the bowl being in the same situation with the stem  a small
piece of burnt clay is placed in the bottom of the bowl to separate the
tobacco from the end of the stem  and is of an irregularly round figure 
not fitting the tube perfectly close  in order that the smoke may pass
with facility  the tobacco is of the same kind with that used by the
minnetarees  mandans and ricaras of the missouri  the shoshonees do not
cultivate this plant  but obtain it from the rocky mountain indians  and
some of the bands of their own nation who live further south  the
ceremony of smoking being concluded  captain lewis explained to the
chief the purposes of his visit  and as by this time all the women and
children of the camp had gathered around the lodge to indulge in a view
of the first white men they had ever seen  he distributed among them the
remainder of the small articles he had brought with him  it was now late
in the afternoon  and our party had tasted no food since the night
before  on apprising the chief of this circumstance  he said that he had
nothing but berries to eat  and presented some cakes made of
serviceberry and chokecherries which had been dried in the sun  on these
captain lewis made a hearty meal  and then walked down towards the
river  he found it a rapid clear stream forty yards wide and three feet
deep  the banks were low and abrupt  like those of the upper part of the
missouri  and the bed formed of loose stones and gravel  its course  as
far as he could observe it  was a little to the north of west  and was
bounded on each side by a range of high mountains  of which those on the
east are the lowest and most distant from the river 

the chief informed him that this stream discharged itself at the
distance of half a day s march  into another of twice its size  coming
from the southwest  but added  on further inquiry  that there was
scarcely more timber below the junction of those rivers than in this
neighbourhood  and that the river was rocky  rapid  and so closely
confined between high mountains  that it was impossible to pass down
it  either by land or water to the great lake  where as he had
understood the white men lived  this information was far from being
satisfactory  for there was no timber here that would answer the purpose
of building canoes  indeed not more than just sufficient for fuel  and
even that consisted of the narrow leafed cotton wood  the red and the
narrow leafed willow  the chokecherry  serviceberry and a few currant
bushes such as are common on the missouri  the prospect of going on by
land is more pleasant  for there are great numbers of horses feeding in
every direction round the camp  which will enable us to transport our
stores if necessary over the mountains  captain lewis returned from the
river to his lodge  and on his way an indian invited him into his bower
and gave him a small morsel of boiled antelope and a piece of fresh
salmon roasted  this was the first salmon he had seen  and perfectly
satisfied him that he was now on the waters of the pacific  on reaching
this lodge  he resumed his conversation with the chief  after which
he was entertained with a dance by the indians  it now proved  as our
party had feared  that the men whom they had first met this morning had
returned to the camp and spread the alarm that their enemies  the
minnetarees of fort de prairie  whom they call pahkees  were advancing
on them  the warriors instantly armed themselves and were coming down in
expectation of an attack  when they were agreeably surprised by meeting
our party  the greater part of them were armed with bows and arrows 
and shields  but a few had small fusils  such as are furnished by the
northwest company traders  and which they had obtained from the indians
on the yellowstone  with whom they are now at peace  they had reason to
dread the approach of the pahkees  who had attacked them in the course
of this spring and totally defeated them  on this occasion twenty of
their warriors were either killed or made prisoners  and they lost their
whole camp except the leathern lodge which they had fitted up for us 
and were now obliged to live in huts of a conical figure made with
willow brush  the music and dancing  which was in no respect different
from those of the missouri indians  continued nearly all night  but
captain lewis retired to rest about twelve o clock  when the fatigues of
the day enabled him to sleep though he was awaked several times by the
yells of the dancers 

whilst all these things were occurring to captain lewis we were slowly
and laboriously ascending the river  for the first two and a half miles
we went along the island opposite to which we encamped last evening  and
soon reached a second island behind which comes in a small creek on the
left side of the river  it rises in the mountains to the east and forms
a handsome valley for some miles from its mouth  where it is a bold
running stream about seven yards wide  we called it m neal s creek 
after hugh m neal one of our party  just above this stream and at the
distance of four miles from our camp is a point of limestone rock on the
right  about seventy feet high  forming a cliff over the river  from the
top of it the beaver s head bore north 24 degrees east twelve miles
distant  the course of wisdom river  that is the direction of its valley
through the mountains is north 25 degrees west  while the gap through
which the jefferson enters the mountains is ten miles above us on a
course south 18 degrees west  from this limestone rock we proceeded
along several islands  on both sides  and after making twelve miles
arrived at a cliff of high rocks on the right  opposite to which we
encamped in a smooth level prairie  near a few cottonwood trees  but
were obliged to use the dry willow brush for fuel  the river is still
very crooked  the bends short and abrupt  and obstructed by so many
shoals  over which the canoes were to be dragged  that the men were in
the water three fourths of the day  they saw numbers of otter  some
beaver  antelopes  ducks  geese  and cranes  but they killed nothing
except a single deer  they  however  caught some very fine trout  as
they have done for several days past  the weather had been cloudy and
cool during the forepart of the day  and at eight o clock a shower of
rain fell 

wednesday 14  in order to give time for the boats to reach the forks of
jefferson river  captain lewis determined to remain here and obtain all
the information he could collect with regard to the country  having
nothing to eat but a little flour and parched meal  with the berries of
the indians  he sent out drewyer and shields  who borrowed horses from
the natives  to hunt for a few hours  about the same time the young
warriors set out for the same purpose  there are but few elk or
blacktailed deer in this neighbourhood  and as the common red deer
secrete themselves in the bushes when alarmed  they are soon safe from
the arrows  which are but feeble weapons against any animals which the
huntsmen cannot previously run down with their horses  the chief game of
the shoshonees  therefore  is the antelope  which when pursued retreats
to the open plains  where the horses have full room for the chase  but
such is its extraordinary fleetness and wind that a single horse has no
possible chance of outrunning it  or tiring it down  and the hunters are
therefore obliged to resort to stratagem  about twenty indians  mounted
on fine horses  and armed with bows and arrows  left the camp  in a
short time they descried a herd of ten antelopes  they immediately
separated into little squads of two or three  and formed a scattered
circle round the herd for five or six miles  keeping at a wary distance 
so as not to alarm them till they were perfectly inclosed  and usually
selecting some commanding eminence as a stand  having gained their
positions  a small party rode towards the herd  and with wonderful
dexterity the huntsman preserved his seat  and the horse his footing  as
he ran at full speed over the hills  and down the steep ravines  and
along the borders of the precipices  they were soon outstripped by the
antelopes  which on gaining the other extremity of the circle were
driven back and pursued by the fresh hunters  they turned and flew 
rather than ran in another direction  but there too  they found new
enemies  in this way they were alternately pursued backwards and
forwards  till at length  notwithstanding the skill of the hunters  they
all escaped  and the party after running for two hours returned without
having caught any thing  and their horses foaming with sweat  this
chase  the greater part of which was seen from the camp  formed a
beautiful scene  but to the hunters is exceedingly laborious  and so
unproductive  even when they are able to worry the animal down and shoot
him  that forty or fifty hunters will sometimes be engaged for half a
day without obtaining more than two or three antelopes  soon after they
returned  our two huntsmen came in with no better success  captain lewis
therefore made a little paste with the flour  and the addition of some
berries formed a very palatable repast  having now secured the good will
of cameahwait  captain lewis informed him of his wish that he would
speak to the warriors and endeavour to engage them to accompany him to
the forks of jefferson river  where by this time another chief with a
large party of white men were waiting his return  that it would be
necessary to take about thirty horses to transport the merchandize  that
they should be well rewarded for their trouble  and that when all the
party should have reached the shoshonee camp they would remain some time
among them  and trade for horses  as well as concert plans for
furnishing them in future with regular supplies of merchandize  he
readily consented to do so  and after collecting the tribe together he
made a long harangue  and in about an hour and a half returned  and told
captain lewis that they would be ready to accompany him in the morning 

as the early part of the day was cold  and the men stiff and sore from
the fatigues of yesterday  we did not set out till seven o clock  at the
distance of a mile we passed a bold stream on the right  which comes
from a snowy mountain to the north  and at its entrance is four yards
wide  and three feet in depth  we called it track creek  at six miles
further we reached another stream which heads in some springs at the
foot of the mountains on the left  alter passing a number of bayous and
small islands on each side  we encamped about half a mile by land below
the rattlesnake cliffs  the river was cold  shallow  and as it
approached the mountains formed one continued rapid  over which we were
obliged to drag the boats with great labour and difficulty  by using
constant exertions we succeeded in making fourteen miles  but this
distance did not carry us more than six and a half in a straight line 
several of the men have received wounds and lamed themselves in hauling
the boats over the stones  the hunters supplied them with five deer and
an antelope 

thursday 15  captain lewis rose early  and having eaten nothing
yesterday except his scanty meal of flour and berries felt the
inconveniences of extreme hunger  on inquiry he found that his whole
stock of provisions consisted of two pounds of flour  this he ordered to
be divided into two equal parts  and one half of it boiled with the
berries into a sort of pudding  and after presenting a large share to
the chief  he and his three men breakfasted on the remainder  cameahwait
was delighted at this new dish  he took a little of the flour in his
hand tasted and examined it very narrowly  asking if it was made of
roots  captain lewis explained the process of preparing it  and he said
it was the best thing he had eaten for a long time 

this being finished  captain lewis now endeavoured to hasten the
departure of the indians who still hesitated  and seemed reluctant to
move  although the chief addressed them twice for the purpose of urging
them  on inquiring the reason  cameahwait told him that some foolish
person had suggested that he was in league with their enemies the
pahkees  and had come only to draw them into ambuscade  but that he
himself did not believe it  captain lewis felt uneasy at this
insinuation  he knew the suspicious temper of the indians  accustomed
from their infancy to regard every stranger as an enemy  and saw that if
this suggestion were not instantly checked  it might hazard the total
failure of the enterprise  assuming therefore a serious air  he told the
chief that he was sorry to find they placed so little confidence in him 
but that he pardoned their suspicions because they were ignorant of the
character of white men  among whom it was disgraceful to lie or entrap
even an enemy by falsehood  that if they continued to think thus meanly
of us they might be assured no white men would ever come to supply them
with arms and merchandize  that there was at this moment a party of
white men waiting to trade with them at the forks of the river  and that
if the greater part of the tribe entertained any suspicion  he hoped
there were still among them some who were men  who would go and see with
their own eyes the truth of what he said  and who  even if there was any
danger  were not afraid to die  to doubt the courage of an indian is to
touch the tenderest string of his mind  and the surest way to rouse him
to any dangerous achievement  cameahwait instantly replied  that he was
not afraid to die  and mounting his horse  for the third time harangued
the warriors  he told them that he was resolved to go if he went alone 
or if he were sure of perishing  that he hoped there were among those
who heard him some who were not afraid to die  and who would prove it by
mounting their horses and following him  this harangue produced an
effect on six or eight only of the warriors  who now joined their chief 
with these captain lewis smoked a pipe  and then fearful of some change
in their capricious temper set out immediately  it was about twelve
o clock when his small party left the camp  attended by cameahwait and
the eight warriors  their departure seemed to spread a gloom over the
village  those who would not venture to go were sullen and melancholy 
and the woman were crying and imploring the great spirit to protect
their warriors as if they were going to certain destruction  yet such
is the wavering inconstancy of these savages  that captain lewis s party
had not gone far when they were joined by ten or twelve more warriors 
and before reaching the creek which they had passed on the morning of
the 13th  all the men of the nation and a number of women had overtaken
them  and had changed from the surly ill temper in which they were two
hours ago  to the greatest cheerfulness and gayety  when they arrived at
the spring on the side of the mountain where the party had encamped on
the 12th  the chief insisted on halting to let the horses graze  to
which captain lewis assented and smoked with them  they are excessively
fond of the pipe  in which however they are not able to indulge much as
they do not cultivate tobacco themselves  and their rugged country
affords them but few articles to exchange for it  here they remained for
about an hour  and on setting out  by engaging to pay four of the party 
captain lewis obtained permission for himself and each of his men to
ride behind an indian  but he soon found riding without stirrup more
tiresome than walking  and therefore dismounted  making the indian carry
his pack  about sunset they reached the upper part of the level valley
in the cove through which he had passed  and which they now called
shoshonee cove  the grass being burnt on the north side of the river
they crossed over to the south  and encamped about four miles above the
narrow pass between the hills noticed as they traversed the cove before 
the river was here about six yards wide  and frequently dammed up by the
beaver  drewyer had been sent forward to hunt  but he returned in the
evening unsuccessful  and their only supper therefore was the remaining
pound of flour stirred in a little boiling water and then divided
between the four white men and two of the indians 

in order not to exhaust the strength of the men  captain clarke did not
leave his camp till after breakfast  although  he was scarcely half a
mile below the rattlesnake cliffs he was obliged to make a circuit of
two miles by water before he reached them  the river now passed between
low and rugged mountains and cliffs formed of a mixture of limestone and
a hard black rock  with no covering except a few scattered pines  at the
distance of four miles is a bold little stream which throws itself from
the mountains down a steep precipice of rocks on the left  one mile
farther is a second point of rocks  and an island  about a mile beyond
which is a creek on the right  ten yards wide and three feet three
inches in depth  with a strong current  we called it willard s creek
after one of our men  alexander willard  three miles beyond this creek 
after passing a high cliff on the right opposite to a steep hill  we
reached a small meadow on the left bank of the river  during its passage
through these hills to willard s creek the river had been less torturous
than usual  so that in the first six miles to willard s creek we had
advanced four miles on our route  we continued on for two miles  till we
reached in the evening a small bottom covered with clover and a few
cottonwood trees  here we passed the night near the remains of some old
indian lodges of brush  the river is as it has been for some days
shallow and rapid  and our men  who are for hours together in the river 
suffer not only from fatigue  but from the extreme coldness of the
water  the temperature of which is as low as that of the freshest
springs in our country  in walking along the side of the river  captain
clarke was very near being bitten twice by rattlesnakes  and the indian
woman narrowly escaped the same misfortune  we caught a number of fine
trout  but the only game procured to day was a buck  which had a
peculiarly bitter taste  proceeding probably from its favourite food 
the willow 

friday  16  as neither our party nor the indians had any thing to eat 
captain lewis sent two of his hunters ahead this morning to procure some
provision  at the same time he requested cameahwait to prevent his young
men from going out  lest by their noise they might alarm the game  but
this measure immediately revived their suspicions  it now began to
be believed that these men were sent forward in order to apprise the
enemy of their coming  and as captain lewis was fearful of exciting any
further uneasiness  he made no objection on seeing a small party of
indians go on each side of the valley under pretence of hunting  but
in reality to watch the movements of our two men  even this precaution
however did not quiet the alarms of the indians  a considerable part of
whom returned home  leaving only twenty eight men and three women  after
the hunters had been gone about an hour  captain lewis again mounted
with one of the indians behind him  and the whole party set out  but
just as they passed through the narrows they saw one of the spies coming
back at full speed across the plain  the chief stopped and seemed
uneasy  the whole band were moved with fresh suspicions  and captain
lewis himself was much disconcerted  lest by some unfortunate accident
some of their enemies might have perhaps straggled that way  the young
indian had scarcely breath to say a few words as he came up  when the
whole troop dashed forward as fast as their horses could carry them  and
captain lewis astonished at this movement was borne along for nearly a
mile before he learnt with great satisfaction that it was all caused
by the spy s having come to announce that one of the white men had
killed a deer  relieved from his anxiety he now found the jolting very
uncomfortable  for the indian behind him being afraid of not getting his
share of the feast had lashed the horse at every step since they set
off  he therefore reined him in and ordered the indian to stop beating
him  the fellow had no idea of losing time in disputing the point 
and jumping off the horse ran for a mile at full speed  captain lewis
slackened his pace  and followed at a sufficient distance to observe
them  when they reached the place where drewyer had thrown out the
intestines  they all dismounted in confusion and ran tumbling over each
other like famished dogs  each tore away whatever part he could and
instantly began to eat it  some had the liver  some the kidneys  in
short no part on which we are accustomed to look with disgust escaped
them  one of them who had seized about nine feet of the entrails was
chewing at one end  while with his hand he was diligently clearing his
way by discharging the contents at the other  it was indeed impossible
to see these wretches ravenously feeding on the filth of animals  and
the blood streaming from their mouths  without deploring how nearly the
condition of savages approaches that of the brute creation  yet though
suffering with hunger they did not attempt  as they might have done  to
take by force the whole deer  but contented themselves with what had
been thrown away by the hunter  captain lewis now had the deer skinned 
and after reserving a quarter of it gave the rest of the animal to the
chief to be divided among the indians  who immediately devoured nearly
the whole of it without cooking  they now went forward towards the creek
where there was some brushwood to make a fire  and found drewyer who had
killed a second deer  the same struggle for the entrails was renewed
here  and on giving nearly the whole deer to the indians  they devoured
it even to the soft part of the hoofs  a fire being made captain lewis
had his breakfast  during which drewyer brought in a third deer  this
too  after reserving one quarter  was given to the indians  who now
seemed completely satisfied and in good humour  at this place they
remained about two hours to let the horses graze  and then continued
their journey  and towards evening reached the lower part of the cove
having on the way shot an antelope  the greater part of which was given
to the indians  as they were now approaching the place where they had
been told by captain lewis they would see the white men  the chief
insisted on halting  they therefore all dismounted  and cameahwait with
great ceremony and as if for ornament  put tippets or skins round the
necks of our party  similar to those worn by themselves  as this was
obviously intended to disguise the white men  captain lewis in order to
inspire them with more confidence put his cocked hat and feather on the
head of the chief  and as his own over shirt was in the indian form  and
his skin browned by the sun  he could not have been distinguished from
an indian  the men followed his example  and the change seemed to be
very agreeable  to the indians 

in order to guard however against any disappointment captain lewis again
explained the possibility of our not having reached the forks in
consequence of the difficulty of the navigation  so that if they should
not find us at that spot they might be assured of our not being far
below  they again all mounted their horses and rode on rapidly  making
one of the indians carry their flag  so that we might recognise them as
they approached us  but to the mortification and disappointment of both
parties on coming within two miles of the forks  no canoes were to be
seen  uneasy lest at this moment he should be abandoned  and all his
hopes of obtaining aid from the indians be destroyed  captain lewis gave
the chief his gun  telling him that if the enemies of his nation were in
the bushes he might defend himself with it  that for his own part he was
not afraid to die  and that the chief might shoot him as soon as they
discovered themselves betrayed  the other three men at the same time
gave their guns to the indians  who now seemed more easy  but still
wavered in their resolutions  as they went on towards the point  captain
lewis perceiving how critical his situation had become  resolved to
attempt a stratagem which his present difficulty seemed completely to
justify  recollecting the notes he had left at the point for us  he sent
drewyer for them with an indian who witnessed his taking them from the
pole  when they were brought  captain lewis told cameahwait that on
leaving his brother chief at the place where the river issues from the
mountains  it was agreed that the boats should not be brought higher
than the next forks we should meet  but that if the rapid water
prevented the boats from coming on as fast as they expected  his brother
chief was to send a note to the first forks above him to let him know
where the boats were  that this note had been left this morning at the
forks  and mentioned that the canoes were just below the mountains  and
coming slowly up in consequence of the current  captain lewis added 
that he would stay at the forks for his brother chief  but would send a
man down the river  and that if cameahwait doubted what he said  one of
their young men would go with him whilst he and the other two remained
at the forks  this story satisfied the chief and the greater part of the
indians  but a few did not conceal their suspicion  observing that we
told different stories  and complaining that the chief exposed them to
danger by a mistaken confidence  captain lewis now wrote by the light of
some willow brush a note to captain clarke  which he gave to drewyer 
with an order to use all possible expedition in ascending the river  and
engaged an indian to accompany him by a promise of a knife and some
beads  at bedtime the chief and five others slept round the fire of
captain lewis  and the rest hid themselves in different parts of the
willow brush to avoid the enemy  who they feared would attack them in
the night  captain lewis endeavoured to assume a cheerfulness he did not
feel to prevent the despondency of the savages  after conversing gayly
with them he retired to his musquitoe bier  by the side of which the
chief now placed himself  he lay down  yet slept but little  being in
fact scarcely less uneasy than his indian companions  he was
apprehensive that finding the ascent of the river impracticable  captain
clarke might have stopped below the rattlesnake bluff  and the messenger
would not meet him  the consequence of disappointing the indians at this
moment would most probably be  that they would retire and secrete
themselves in the mountains  so as to prevent our having an opportunity
of recovering their confidence  they would also spread a panic through
all the neighbouring indians  and cut us off from the supply of horses
so useful and almost so essential to our success  he was at the same
time consoled by remembering that his hopes of assistance rested on
better foundations than their generosity  their avarice  and their
curiosity  he had promised liberal exchanges for their horses  but what
was still move seductive  he had told them that one of their
country women who had been taken with the minnetarees accompanied the
party below  and one of the men had spread the report of our having with
us a man perfectly black  whose hair was short and curled  this last
account had excited a great degree of curiosity  and they seemed more
desirous of seeing this monster than of obtaining the most favourable
barter for their horses 

in the meantime we had set out after breakfast  and although we
proceeded with more ease than we did yesterday  the river was still so
rapid and shallow as to oblige us to drag the large canoes during the
greater part of the day  for the first seven miles the river formed a
bend to the right so as to make our advance only three miles in a
straight line  the stream is crooked  narrow  small  and shallow  with
highlands occasionally on the banks  and strewed with islands  four of
which are opposite to each other  near this place we left the valley  to
which we gave the name of serviceberry valley  from the abundance of
that fruit now ripe which is found in it  in the course of the four
following miles we passed several more islands and bayous on each side
of the river  and reached a high cliff on the right  two and a half
miles beyond this the cliffs approach on both sides and form a very
considerable rapid near the entrance of a bold running stream on the
left  the water was now excessively cold  and the rapids had been
frequent and troublesome  on ascending an eminence captain clarke saw
the forks of the river and sent the hunters up  they must have left it
only a short time before captain lewis s arrival  but fortunately had
not seen the note which enabled him to induce the indians to stay with
him  from the top of this eminence he could discover only three trees
through the whole country  nor was there along the sides of the cliffs
they had passed in the course of the day  any timber except a few small
pines  the low grounds were supplied with willow  currant bushes  and
serviceberries  after advancing half a mile further we came to the lower
point of an island near the middle of the river  and about the centre of
the valley  here we halted for the night  only four miles by land 
though ten by water  below the point where captain lewis lay  although
we had made only fourteen miles  the labours of the men had fatigued and
exhausted them very much  we therefore collected some small willow brush
for a fire  and lay down to sleep 




                               chapter xv 

     affecting interview between the wife of chaboneau and the chief of
     the shoshonees  council held with that nation  and favourable
     result  the extreme navigable point of the missouri
     mentioned  general character of the river and of the country
     through which it passes  captain clarke in exploring the source of
     the columbia falls in company with another party of shoshonees  the
     geographical information acquired from one of that party  their
     manner of catching fish  the party reach lewis river  the
     difficulties which captain clarke had to encounter in his
     route  friendship and hospitality of the shoshonees  the party with
     captain lewis employed in making saddles  and preparing for the
     journey 


saturday  august 17  captain lewis rose very early and despatched
drewyer and the indian down the river in quest of the boats  shields was
sent out at the same time to hunt  while m neal prepared a breakfast out
of the remainder of the meat  drewyer had been gone about two hours  and
the indians were all anxiously waiting for some news  when an indian who
had straggled a short distance down the river  returned with a report
that he had seen the white men  who were only a short distance below 
and were coming on  the indians were all transported with joy  and the
chief in the warmth of his satisfaction renewed his embrace to captain
lewis  who was quite as much delighted as the indians themselves  the
report proved most agreeably true  on setting out at seven o clock 
captain clarke with chaboneau and his wife walked on shore  but they had
not gone more than a mile before captain clarke saw sacajawea  who was
with her husband one hundred yards ahead  began to dance  and show every
mark of the most extravagant joy  turning round him and pointing to
several indians  whom he now saw advancing on horseback  sucking her
fingers at the same time to indicate that they were of her native tribe 
as they advanced captain clarke discovered among them drewyer dressed
like an indian  from whom he learnt the situation of the party  while
the boats were performing the circuit  he went towards the forks with
the indians  who as they went along  sang aloud with the greatest
appearance of delight  we soon drew near to the camp  and just as we
approached it a woman made her way through the crowd towards sacajawea 
and recognising each other  they embraced with the most tender
affection  the meeting of these two young women had in it something
peculiarly touching  not only in the ardent manner in which their
feelings were expressed  but from the real interest of their situation 
they had been companions in childhood  in the war with the minnetarees
they had both been taken prisoners in the same battle  they had shared
and softened the rigours of their captivity  till one of them had
escaped from the minnetarees  with scarce a hope of ever seeing her
friend relieved from the hands of her enemies  while sacajawea was
renewing among the women the friendships of former days  captain clarke
went on  and was received by captain lewis and the chief  who after the
first embraces and salutations were over  conducted him to a sort of
circular tent or shade of willows  here he was seated on a white robe 
and the chief immediately tied in his hair six small shells resembling
pearls  an ornament highly valued by these people  who procured them in
the course of trade from the seacoast  the moccasins of the whole party
were then taken off  and after much ceremony the smoking began  after
this the conference was to be opened  and glad of an opportunity of
being able to converse more intelligibly  sacajawea was sent for  she
came into the tent  sat down  and was beginning to interpret  when in
the person of cameahwait she recognised her brother  she instantly
jumped up  and ran and embraced him  throwing over him her blanket and
weeping profusely  the chief was himself moved  though not in the same
degree  after some conversation between them she resumed her seat  and
attempted to interpret for us  but her new situation seemed to
overpower her  and she was frequently interrupted by her tears  after
the council was finished  the unfortunate woman learnt that all her
family were dead except two brothers  one of whom was absent  and a son
of her eldest sister  a small boy  who was immediately adopted by her 
the canoes arriving soon after  we formed a camp in a meadow on the left
side  a little below the forks  took out our baggage  and by means of
our sails and willow poles formed a canopy for our indian visitors 
about four o clock the chiefs and warriors were collected  and after the
customary ceremony of taking off the moccasins and smoking a pipe  we
explained to them in a long harangue the purposes of our visit  making
themselves one conspicuous object of the good wishes of our government 
on whose strength as well as its friendly disposition we expatiated  we
told them of their dependance on the will of our government for all
future supplies of whatever was necessary either for their comfort or
defence  that as we were sent to discover the best route by which
merchandize could be conveyed to them  and no trade would be begun
before our return  it was mutually advantageous that we should proceed
with as little delay as possible  that we were under the necessity of
requesting them to furnish us with horses to transport our baggage
across the mountains  and a guide to show us the route  but that they
should be amply remunerated for their horses  as well as for every other
service they should render us  in the meantime our first wish was  that
they should immediately collect as many horses as were necessary to
transport our baggage to their village  where  at our leisure we would
trade with them for as many horses as they could spare 

the speech made a favourable impression  the chief in reply thanked us
for our expressions of friendship towards himself and his nation  and
declared their willingness to render us every service  he lamented that
it would be so long before they should be supplied with firearms  but
that till then they could subsist as they had heretofore done  he
concluded by saying that there were not horses here sufficient to
transport our goods  but that he would return to the village to morrow 
and bring all his own horses  and encourage his people to come over with
theirs  the conference being ended to our satisfaction  we now inquired
of cameahwait what chiefs were among the party  and he pointed out two
of them  we then distributed our presents  to cameahwait we gave a medal
of the small size  with the likeness of president jefferson  and on the
reverse a figure of hands clasped with a pipe and tomahawk  to this was
added an uniform coat  a shirt  a pair of scarlet leggings  a carrot of
tobacco  and some small articles  each of the other chiefs received a
small medal struck during the presidency of general washington  a shirt 
handkerchief  leggings  a knife  and some tobacco  medals of the same
sort were also presented to two young warriors  who though not chiefs
were promising youths and very much respected in the tribe  these
honorary gifts were followed by presents of paint  moccasins  awls 
knives  beads and looking glasses  we also gave them all a plentiful
meal of indian corn  of which the hull is taken off by being boiled in
lye  and as this was the first they had ever tasted  they were very much
pleased with it  they had indeed abundant sources of surprise in all
they saw  the appearance of the men  their arms  their clothing  the
canoes  the strange looks of the negro  and the sagacity of our dog  all
in turn shared their admiration  which was raised to astonishment by a
shot from the airgun  this operation was instantly considered as a
 great medicine   by which they as well as the other indians mean
something emanating directly from the great spirit  or produced by his
invisible and incomprehensible agency  the display of all these riches
had been intermixed with inquiries into the geographical situation of
their country  for we had learnt by experience  that to keep the savages
in good temper their attention should not be wearied with too much
business  but that the serious affairs should be enlivened by a mixture
of what is new and entertaining  our hunters brought in very seasonably
four deer and an antelope  the last of which we gave to the indians  who
in a very short time devoured it  after the council was over  we
consulted as to our future operations  the game does not promise to last
here for a number of days  and this circumstance combined with many
others to induce our going on as soon as possible  our indian
information as to the state of the columbia is of a very alarming kind 
and our first object is of course to ascertain the practicability of
descending it  of which the indians discourage our expectations  it was
therefore agreed that captain clarke should set off in the morning with
eleven men  furnished  besides their arms  with tools for making canoes 
that he should take chaboneau and his wife to the camp of the
shoshonees  where he was to leave them  in order to hasten the
collection of horses  that he was then to lead his men down to the
columbia  and if he found it navigable  and the timber in sufficient
quantity  begin to build canoes  as soon as he had decided as to the
propriety of proceeding down the columbia or across the mountains  he
was to send back one of the men with information of it to captain lewis 
who by that time would have brought up the whole party  and the rest of
the baggage as far as the shoshonee village 

preparations were accordingly made this evening for such an arrangement 
the sun is excessively hot in the day time  but the nights very cold 
and rendered still more unpleasant from the want of any fuel except
willow brush  the appearances too of game  for many days  subsistence 
are not very favourable 

sunday 18  in order to relieve the men of captain clarke s party from
the heavy weight of their arms provisions and tools  we exposed a few
articles to barter for horses  and soon obtained three very good ones 
in exchange for which we gave a uniform coat  a pair of leggings  a few
handkerchiefs  three knifes and some other small articles  the whole of
which did not in the united states cost more than twenty dollars  a
fourth was purchased by the men for an old checkered shirt  a pair of
old leggings and a knife  the indians seemed to be quite as well pleased
as ourselves at the bargains they had made  we now found that the two
inferior chiefs were somewhat displeased at not having received a
present equal to that given to the great chief  who appeared in a dress
so much finer than their own  to allay their discontent  we bestowed on
them two old coats  and promised them that if they were active in
assisting us across the mountains they should have an additional
present  this treatment completely reconciled them  and the whole indian
party  except two men and two women  set out in perfect good humour to
return home with captain clarke  after going fifteen miles through a
wide level valley with no wood but willows and shrubs  he encamped in
the shoshonee cove near a narrow pass where the highlands approach
within two hundred yards of each other  and the river is only ten yards
wide  the indians went on further  except the three chiefs and two young
men  who assisted in eating two deer brought in by the hunters  after
their departure every thing was prepared for the transportation of the
baggage  which was now exposed to the air and dried  our game was one
deer and a beaver  and we saw an abundance of trout in the river for
which we fixed a net in the evening 

we have now reached the extreme navigable point of the missouri  which
our observation places in latitude 43 degrees 30  43  north  it is
difficult to comprise in any general description the characteristics of
a river so extensive  and fed by so many streams which have their
sources in a great variety of soils and climates  but the missouri is
still sufficiently powerful to give to all its waters something of a
common character  which is of course decided by the nature of the
country through which it passes  the bed of the river is chiefly
composed of a blue mud from which the water itself derives a deep
tinge  from its junction here to the place near which it leaves the
mountains  its course is embarrassed by rapids and rocks which the hills
on each side have thrown into its channel  from that place  its current 
with the exception of the falls  is not difficult of navigation  nor is
there much variation in its appearance till the mouth of the platte 
that powerful river throws out vast quantities of coarse sand which
contribute to give a new face to the missouri  which is now much more
impeded by islands  the sand  as it is drifted down  adheres in time to
some of the projecting points from the shore  and forms a barrier to the
mud  which at length fills to the same height with the sandbar itself 
as soon as it has acquired a consistency  the willow grows there the
first year  and by its roots assists the solidity of the whole  as the
mud and sand accumulate the cottonwood tree next appears  till the
gradual excretion of soils raises the surface of the point above the
highest freshets  thus stopped in its course the water seeks a passage
elsewhere  and as the soil on each side is light and yielding  what was
only a peninsula  becomes gradually an island  and the river indemnifies
itself for the usurpation by encroaching on the adjacent shore  in this
way the missouri like the mississippi is constantly cutting off the
projections of the shore  and leaving its ancient channel  which is then
marked by the mud it has deposited and a few stagnant ponds 

the general appearance of the country as it presents itself on ascending
may be thus described  from its mouth to the two charletons  a ridge of
highlands borders the river at a small distance  leaving between them
fine rich meadows  from the mouth of the two charletons the hills recede
from the river  giving greater extent to the low grounds  but they again
approach the river for a short distance near grand river  and again at
snake creek  from that point they retire  nor do they come again to the
neighbourhood of the river till above the sauk prairie  where they are
comparatively low and small  thence they diverge and reappear at the
charaton searty  after which they are scarcely if at all discernible 
till they advance to the missouri nearly opposite to the kanzas 

the same ridge of hills extends on the south side  in almost one
unbroken chain  from the mouth of the missouri to the kanzas  though
decreasing in height beyond the osage  as they are nearer the river than
the hills on the opposite sides  the intermediate low grounds are of
course narrower  but the general character of the soil is common to both
sides 

in the meadows and along the shore  the tree most common is the
cottonwood  which with the willow forms almost the exclusive growth of
the missouri  the hills or rather high grounds  for they do not rise
higher than from one hundred and fifty to two hundred feet  are composed
of a good rich black soil  which is perfectly susceptible of
cultivation  though it becomes richer on the hills beyond the platte 
and are in general thinly covered with timber  beyond these hills the
country extends into high open plains  which are on both sides
sufficiently fertile  but the south has the advantage of better streams
of water  and may therefore be considered as preferable for settlements 
the lands  however  become much better and the timber more abundant
between the osage and the kanzas  from the kanzas to the nadawa the
hills continue at nearly an equal distance  varying from four to eight
miles from each other  except that from the little platte to nearly
opposite the ancient kanzas village  the hills are more remote  and the
meadows of course wider on the north side of the river  from the nadawa
the northern hills disappear  except at occasional intervals  where they
are seen at a distance  till they return about twenty seven miles above
the platte near the ancient village of the ayoways  on the south the
hills continue close to the river from the ancient village of the kanzas
up to council bluff  fifty miles beyond the platte  forming high
prairie lands  on both sides the lands are good  and perhaps this
distance from the osage to the platte may be recommended as among the
best districts on the missouri for the purposes of settlers 

from the ayoway village the northern hills again retire from the river 
to which they do not return till three hundred and twenty miles above 
at floyd s river  the hills on the south also leave the river at council
bluffs  and reappear at the mahar village  two hundred miles up the
missouri  the country thus abandoned by the hills is more open and the
timber in smaller quantities than below the platte  so that although the
plain is rich and covered with high grass  the want of wood renders it
less calculated for cultivation than below that river 

the northern hills after remaining near the missouri for a few miles at
floyd s river  recede from it at the sioux river  the course of which
they follow  and though they again visit the missouri at whitestone
river  where they are low  yet they do not return to it till beyond
james river  the highlands on the south  after continuing near the river
at the mahar villages  again disappear  and do not approach it till the
cobalt bluffs  about forty four miles from the villages  and then from
those bluffs to the yellowstone river  a distance of about one thousand
miles  they follow the banks of the river with scarcely any deviation 

from the james river  the lower grounds are confined within a narrow
space by the hills on both sides  which now continue near each other up
to the mountains  the space between them however varies from one to
three miles as high as the muscleshell river  from which the hills
approach so high as to leave scarcely any low grounds on the river  and
near the falls reach the waters edge  beyond the falls the hills are
scattered and low to the first range of mountains 

the soil during the whole length of the missouri below the platte is
generally speaking very fine  and although the timber is scarce  there
is still sufficient for the purposes of settlers  but beyond that river 
although the soil is still rich  yet the almost total absence of timber 
and particularly the want of good water  of which there is but a small
quantity in the creeks  and even that brackish  oppose powerful
obstacles to its settlement  the difficulty becomes still greater
between the muscleshell river and the falls  where besides the greater
scarcity of timber  the country itself is less fertile 

the elevation of these highlands varies as they pass through this
extensive tract of country  from wood river they are about one hundred
and fifty feet above the water  and continue at that height till they
rise near the osage  from which place to the ancient fortification they
again diminish in size  thence they continue higher till the mandan
village  after which they are rather lower till the neighbourhood of
muscleshell river  where they are met by the northern hills  which have
advanced at a more uniform height  varying from one hundred and fifty to
two hundred or three hundred feet  from this place to the mountains the
height of both is nearly the same  from three hundred to five hundred
feet  and the low grounds so narrow that the traveller seems passing
through a range of high country  from maria s river to the falls  the
hills descend to the height of about two or three hundred feet 

monday 19  the morning was cold  and the grass perfectly whitened by the
frost  we were engaged in preparing packs and saddles to load the horses
as soon as they should arrive  a beaver was caught in a trap  but we
were disappointed in trying to catch trout in our net  we therefore made
a seine of willow brush  and by hauling it procured a number of fine
trout  and a species of mullet which we had not seen before  it is about
sixteen inches long  the scales small  the nose long  obtusely pointed 
and exceeding the under jaw  the mouth opens with folds at the sides  it
has no teeth  and the tongue and palate is smooth  the colour of its
back and sides is a bluish brown  while the belly is white  it has the
faggot bones  whence we concluded it to be of the mullet species  it is
by no means so well flavoured a fish as the trout  which are the same as
those we first saw at the falls  larger than the speckled trout of the
mountains in the atlantic states  and equally well flavoured  in the
evening the hunters returned with two deer 

captain clarke  in the meantime  proceeded through a wide level valley 
in which the chief pointed out a spot where many of his tribe were
killed in battle a year ago  the indians accompanied him during the day 
and as they had nothing to eat  he was obliged to feed them from his own
stores  the hunters not being able to kill any thing  just as he was
entering the mountains  he met an indian with two mules and a spanish
saddle  who was so polite as to offer one of them to him to ride over
the hills  being on foot  captain clarke accepted his offer and gave him
a waistcoat as a reward for his civility  he encamped for the night on a
small stream  and the next morning 

tuesday  august 20  he set out at six o clock  in passing through a
continuation of the hilly broken country  he met several parties of
indians  on coming near the camp  which had been removed since we left
them two miles higher up the river  cameahwait requested that the party
should halt  this was complied with  a number of indians came out from
the camp  and with great ceremony several pipes were smoked  this being
over captain clarke was conducted to a large leathern lodge prepared for
his party in the middle of the encampment  the indians having only
shelters of willow bushes  a few dried berries  and one salmon  the only
food the whole village could contribute  were then presented to him 
after which he proceeded to repeat in council  what had been already
told them  the purposes of his visit  urged them to take their horses
over and assist in transporting our baggage  and expressed a wish to
obtain a guide to examine the river  this was explained and enforced to
the whole village by cameahwait  and an old man was pointed out who was
said to know more of their geography to the north than any other person 
and whom captain clarke engaged to accompany him  after explaining his
views he distributed a few presents  the council was ended  and nearly
half the village set out to hunt the antelope  but returned without
success 

captain clarke in the meantime made particular inquiries as to the
situation of the country  and the possibility of soon reaching a
navigable water  the chief began by drawing on the ground a delineation
of the rivers  from which it appeared that his information was very
limited  the river on which the camp is he divided into two branches
just above us  which  as he indicated by the opening of the mountains 
were in view  he next made it discharge itself into a larger river ten
miles below  coming from the southwest  the joint stream continued one
day s march to the northwest  and then inclined to the westward for two
day s march farther  at that place he placed several heaps of sand on
each side  which  as he explained them  represented  vast mountains of
rock always covered with snow  in passing through which the river was so
completely hemmed in by the high rocks  that there was no possibility of
travelling along the shore  that the bed of the river was obstructed by
sharp pointed rocks  and such its rapidity  that as far as the eye could
reach it presented a perfect column of foam  the mountains he said were
equally inaccessible  as neither man nor horse could cross them  that
such being the state of the country neither he nor any of his nation had
ever attempted to go beyond the mountains  cameahwait said also that he
had been informed by the chopunnish  or pierced nose indians  who reside
on this river west of the mountains  that it ran a great way towards the
setting sun  and at length lost itself in a great lake of water which
was ill tasted  and where the white men lived  an indian belonging to a
band of shoshonees who live to the southwest  and who happened to be at
camp  was then brought in  and inquiries made of him as to the
situation of the country in that direction  this he described in terms
scarcely less terrible than those in which cameahwait had represented
the west  he said that his relations lived at the distance of twenty
days  march from this place  on a course a little to the west of south
and not far from the whites  with whom they traded for horses  mules 
cloth  metal  beads  and the shells here worn as ornaments  and which
are those of a species of pearl oyster  in order to reach his country we
should be obliged during the first seven days to climb over steep rocky
mountains where there was no game  and we should find nothing but roots
for subsistence  even for these however we should be obliged to contend
with a fierce warlike people  whom he called the broken moccasin  or
moccasin with holes  who lived like bears in holes  and fed on roots and
the flesh of such horses as they could steal or plunder from those who
passed through the mountains  so rough indeed was the passage  that the
feet of the horses would be wounded in such a manner that many of them
would be unable to proceed  the next part of the route was for ten days
through a dry parched desert of sand  inhabited by no animal which would
supply us with subsistence  and as the sun had now scorched up the grass
and dried up the small pools of water which are sometimes scattered
through this desert in the spring  both ourselves and our horses would
perish for want of food and water  about the middle of this plain a
large river passes from southeast to northwest  which  though navigable 
afforded neither timber nor salmon  three or four days  march beyond
this plain his relations lived  in a country tolerably fertile and
partially covered with timber  on another large river running in the
same direction as the former  that this last discharges itself into a
third large river  on which resided many numerous nations  with whom his
own were at war  but whether this last emptied itself into the great or
stinking lake  as they called the ocean  he did not know  that from his
country to the stinking lake was a great distance  and that the route
to it  taken by such of his relations as had visited it  was up the
river on which they lived  and over to that on which the white people
lived  and which they knew discharged itself into the ocean  this route
he advised us to take  but added  that we had better defer the journey
till spring  when he would himself conduct us  this account persuaded us
that the streams of which he spoke were southern branches of the
columbia  heading with the rio des apostolos  and rio colorado  and that
the route which he mentioned was to the gulf of california  captain
clarke therefore told him that this road was too much towards the south
for our purpose  and then requested to know if there was no route on the
left of the river where we now are  by which we might intercept it below
the mountains  but he knew of none except that through the barren
plains  which he said joined the mountains on that side  and through
which it was impossible to pass at this season  even if we were
fortunate enough to escape the broken moccasin indians  captain clarke
recompensed the indian by a present of a knife  with which he seemed
much gratified  and now inquired of cameahwait by what route the
pierced nose indians  who he said lived west of the mountains  crossed
over to the missouri  this he said was towards the north  but that the
road was a very bad one  that during the passage he had been told they
suffered excessively from hunger  being obliged to subsist for many days
on berries alone  there being no game in that part of the mountains 
which were broken and rocky  and so thickly covered with timber that
they could scarcely pass  surrounded by difficulties as all the other
routes are  this seems to be the most practicable of all the passages by
land  since  if the indians can pass the mountains with their women and
children  no difficulties which they could encounter could be formidable
to us  and if the indians below the mountains are so numerous as they
are represented to be  they must have some means of subsistence equally
within our power  they tell us indeed that the nations to the westward
subsist principally on fish and roots  and that their only game were a
few elk  deer  and antelope  there being no buffaloe west of the
mountain  the first inquiry however was to ascertain the truth of their
information relative to the difficulty of descending the river  for this
purpose captain clarke set out at three o clock in the afternoon 
accompanied by the guide and all his men  except one whom he left with
orders to purchase a horse and join him as soon as possible  at the
distance of four miles he crossed the river  and eight miles from the
camp halted for the night at a small stream  the road which he followed
was a beaten path through a wide rich meadow  in which were several old
lodges  on the route he met a number of men  women  and children  as
well as horses  and one of the men who appeared to possess some
consideration turned back with him  and observing a woman with three
salmon obtained them from her  and presented them to the party  captain
clarke shot a mountain cock or cock of the plains  a dark brown bird
larger than the dunghill fowl  with a long and pointed tail  and a
fleshy protuberance about the base of the upper chop  something like
that of the turkey  though without the snout  in the morning 

wednesday 21  he resumed his march early  and at the distance of five
miles reached an indian lodge of brush  inhabited by seven families of
shoshonees  they behaved with great civility  gave the whole party as
much boiled salmon as they could eat  and added as a present several
dried salmon and a considerable quantity of chokecherries  after smoking
with them all he visited the fish weir  which was about two hundred
yards distant  the river was here divided by three small islands  which
occasioned the water to pass along four channels  of these three were
narrow  and stopped by means of trees which were stretched across  and
supported by willow stakes  sufficiently near each other to prevent the
passage of the fish  about the centre of each was placed a basket
formed of willows  eighteen or twenty feet in length  of a cylindrical
form  and terminating in a conic shape at its lower extremity  this was
situated with its mouth upwards  opposite to an aperture in the weir 
the main channel of the water was then conducted to this weir  and as
the fish entered it they were so entangled with each other that they
could not move  and were taken out by untying the small end of the
willow basket  the weir in the main channel was formed in a manner
somewhat different  there were in fact two distinct weirs formed of
poles and willow sticks quite across the river  approaching each other
obliquely with an aperture in each side near the angle  this is made by
tying a number of poles together at the top  in parcels of three  which
were then set up in a triangular form at the base  two of the poles
being in the range desired for the weir  and the third down the stream 
to these poles two ranges of other poles are next lashed horizontally 
with willow bark and wythes  and willow sticks joined in with these
crosswise  so as to form a kind of wicker work from the bottom of the
river to the height of three or four feet above the surface of the
water  this is so thick as to prevent the fish from passing  and even in
some parts with the help of a little gravel and some stone enables them
to give any direction which they wish to the water  these two weirs
being placed near to each other  one for the purpose of catching the
fish as they ascend  the other as they go down the river  is provided
with two baskets made in the form already described  and which are
placed at the apertures of the weir  after examining these curious
objects  he returned to the lodges  and soon passed the river to the
left  where an indian brought him a tomahawk which he said he had found
in the grass  near the lodge where captain lewis had staid on his first
visit to the village  this was a tomahawk which had been missed at the
time  and supposed to be stolen  it was however the only article which
had been lost in our intercourse with the nation  and as even that was
returned the inference is highly honourable to the integrity of the
shoshonees  on leaving the lodges captain clarke crossed to the left
side of the river  and despatched five men to the forks of it  in search
of the man left behind yesterday  who procured a horse and passed by
another road as they learnt  to the forks  at the distance of fourteen
miles they killed a very large salmon  two and a half feet long  in a
creek six miles below the forks  and after travelling about twenty miles
through the valley  following the course of the river  which runs nearly
northwest  halted in a small meadow on the right side  under a cliff of
rocks  here they were joined by the five men who had gone in quest of
crusatte  they had been to the forks of the river  where the natives
resort in great numbers for the purpose of gigging fish  of which they
made our men a present of five fresh salmon  in addition to this food 
one deer was killed to day  the western branch of this river is much
larger than the eastern  and after we passed the junction we found the
river about one hundred yards in width  rapid and shoaly  but containing
only a small quantity of timber  as captain lewis was the first white
man who visited its waters  captain clarke gave it the name of lewis s
river  the low grounds through which he had passed to day were rich and
wide  but at his camp this evening the hills begin to assume a
formidable aspect  the cliff under which he lay is of a reddish brown
colour  the rocks which have fallen from it are a dark brown flintstone 
near the place are gullies of white sandstone  and quantities of a fine
sand  of a snowy whiteness  the mountains on each side are high and
rugged  with some pine trees scattered over them 

thursday 22  he soon began to perceive that the indian accounts had not
exaggerated  at the distance of a mile he passed a small creek  and the
points of four mountains  which were rocky  and so high that it seemed
almost impossible to cross them with horses  the road lay over the sharp
fragments of rocks which had fallen from the mountains  and were strewed
in heaps for miles together  yet the horses altogether unshod 
travelled across them as fast as the men  and without detaining them a
moment  they passed two bold running streams  and reached the entrance
of a small river  where a few indian families resided  they had not been
previously acquainted with the arrival of the whites  the guide was
behind  and the wood so thick that we came upon them unobserved  till at
a very short distance  as soon as they saw us  the women and children
fled in great consternation  the men offered us every thing they had 
the fish on the scaffolds  the dried berries and the collars of elk s
tushes worn by the children  we took only a small quantity of the food 
and gave them in return some small articles which conduced very much to
pacify them  the guide now coming up  explained to them who we were  and
the object of our visit  which seemed to relieve the fears  but still a
number of the women and children did not recover from their fright  but
cryed during our stay  which lasted about an hour  the guide  whom we
found a very intelligent friendly old man  informed us that up this
river there was a road which led over the mountains to the missouri  on
resuming his route  he went along the steep side of a mountain about
three miles  and then reached the river near a small island  at the
lower part of which he encamped  he here attempted to gig some fish  but
could only obtain one small salmon  the river is here shoal and rapid 
with many rocks scattered in various directions through its bed  on the
sides of the mountains are some scattered pines  and of those on the
left the tops are covered with them  there are however but few in the
low grounds through which they passed  indeed they have seen only a
single tree fit to make a canoe  and even that was small  the country
has an abundant growth of berries  and we met several women and children
gathering them who bestowed them upon us with great liberality  among
the woods captain clarke observed a species of woodpecker  the beak and
tail of which were white  the wings black  and every other part of the
body of a dark brown  its size was that of the robin  and it fed on the
seeds of the pine 

friday 23  captain clarke set off very early  but as his route lay along
the steep side of a mountain  over irregular and broken masses of rocks 
which wounded the horses  feet  he was obliged to proceed slowly  at the
distance of four miles he reached the river  but the rocks here became
so steep  and projected so far into the river  that there was no mode of
passing  except through the water  this he did for some distance  though
the river was very rapid  and so deep that they were forced to swim
their horses  after following the edge of the water for about a mile
under this steep cliff  he reached a small meadow  below which the whole
current of the river beat against the right shore on which he was  and
which was formed of a solid rock perfectly inaccessible to horses  here
too  the little track which he had been pursuing terminated  he
therefore resolved to leave the horses and the greater part of the men
at this place  and examine the river still further  in order to
determine if there were any possibility of descending it in canoes 
having killed nothing except a single goose to day  and the whole of our
provision being consumed last evening  it was by no means advisable to
remain any length of time where they were  he now directed the men to
fish and hunt at this place till his return  and then with his guide and
three men he proceeded  clambering over immense rocks  and along the
side of lofty precipices which bordered the river  when at about twelve
miles distance he reached a small meadow  the first he had seen on the
river since he left his party  a little below this meadow  a large creek
twelve yards wide  and of some depth  discharges itself from the north 
here were some recent signs of an indian encampment  and the tracks of a
number of horses  who must have come along a plain indian path  which he
now saw following the course of the creek  this stream his guide said
led towards a large river running to the north  and was frequented by
another nation for the purpose of catching fish  he remained here two
hours  and having taken some small fish  made a dinner on them with the
addition of a few berries  from the place where he had left the party 
to the mouth of this creek  it presents one continued rapid  in which
are five shoals  neither of which could be passed with loaded canoes 
and the baggage must therefore be transported for a considerable
distance over the steep mountains  where it would be impossible to
employ horses for the relief of the men  even the empty canoes must be
let down the rapids by means of cords  and not even in that way without
great risk both to the canoes as well as to the men  at one of these
shoals  indeed the rocks rise so perpendicularly from the water as to
leave no hope of a passage or even a portage without great labour in
removing rocks  and in some instances cutting away the earth  to
surmount these difficulties would exhaust the strength of the party  and
what is equally discouraging would waste our time and consume our
provisions  of neither of which have we much to spare  the season is now
far advanced  and the indians tell us we shall shortly have snow  the
salmon too have so far declined that the natives themselves are
hastening from the country  and not an animal of any kind larger than a
pheasant or a squirrel  and of even these a few only will then be seen
in this part of the mountains  after which we shall be obliged to rely
on our own stock of provisions  which will not support us more than ten
days  these circumstances combine to render a passage by water
impracticable in our present situation  to descend the course of the
river on horseback is the other alternative  and scarcely a more
inviting one  the river is so deep that there are only a few places
where it can be forded  and the rocks approach so near the water as to
render it impossible to make a route along the waters  edge  in crossing
the mountains themselves we should have to encounter  besides their
steepness  one barren surface of broken masses of rock  down which in
certain seasons the torrents sweep vast quantities of stone into the
river  these rocks are of a whitish brown  and towards the base of a
gray colour  and so hard  that on striking them with steel  they yield a
fire like flint  this sombre appearance is in some places scarcely
relieved by a single tree  though near the river and on the creeks there
is more timber  among which are some tall pine  several of these might
be made into canoes  and by lashing two of them together  one of
tolerable size might be formed 

after dinner he continued his route  and at the distance of half a mile
passed another creek about five yards wide  here his guide informed him
that by ascending the creek for some distance he would have a better
road  and cut off a considerable bend of the river towards the south  he
therefore pursued a well beaten indian track up this creek for about six
miles  when leaving the creek to the right he passed over a ridge  and
after walking a mile again met the river  where it flows through a
meadow of about eighty acres in extent  this they passed and then
ascended a high and steep point of a mountain  from which the guide now
pointed out where the river broke through the mountains about twenty
miles distant  near the base of the mountains a small river falls in
from the south  this view was terminated by one of the loftiest
mountains captain clarke had ever seen  which was perfectly covered with
snow  towards this formidable barrier the river went directly on  and
there it was  as the guide observed  that the difficulties and dangers
of which he and cameahwait had spoken commenced  after reaching the
mountain  he said  the river continues its course towards the north for
many miles  between high perpendicular rocks  which were scattered
through its bed  it then penetrated the mountain through a narrow gap 
on each side of which arose perpendicularly a rock as high as the top of
the mountain before them  that the river then made a bend which
concealed its future course from view  and as it was alike impossible
to descend the river or clamber over that vast mountain  eternally
covered with snow  neither he nor any of his nation had ever been lower
than at a place where they could see the gap made by the river on
entering the mountain  to that place he said he would conduct captain
clarke if he desired it by the next evening  but he was in need of no
further evidence to convince him of the utter impracticability of the
route before him  he had already witnessed the difficulties of part of
the road  yet after all these dangers his guide  whose intelligence and
fidelity he could not doubt  now assured him that the difficulties were
only commencing  and what he saw before him too clearly convinced him of
the indian s veracity  he therefore determined to abandon this route 
and returned to the upper part of the last creek we had passed  and
reaching it an hour after dark encamped for the night  on this creek he
had seen in the morning an indian road coming in from the north 
disappointed in finding a route by water  captain clarke now questioned
his guide more particularly as to the direction of this road which he
seemed to understand perfectly  he drew a map on the sand  and
represented this road as well as that we passed yesterday on berry creek
as both leading towards two forks of the same great river  where resided
a nation called tushepaws  who having no salmon on their river  came by
these roads to the fish weirs on lewis s river  he had himself been
among these tushepaws  and having once accompanied them on a fishing
party to another river he had there seen indians who had come across the
rocky mountains  after a great deal of conversation  or rather signs 
and a second and more particular map from his guide  captain clarke felt
persuaded that his guide knew of a road from the shoshonee village they
had left  to the great river to the north  without coming so low down as
this on a route impracticable for horses  he was desirous of hastening
his return  and therefore set out early 

saturday 24  and after descending the creek to the river  stopped to
breakfast on berries in the meadow above the second creek  he then went
on  but unfortunately fell from a rock and injured his leg very much  he
however walked on as rapidly as he could  and at four in the afternoon
rejoined his men  during his absence they had killed one of the mountain
cocks  a few pheasants  and some small fish  on which with haws and
serviceberries they had subsisted  captain clarke immediately sent
forward a man on horseback with a note to captain lewis  apprising him
of the result of his inquiries  and late in the afternoon set out with
the rest of the party and encamped at the distance of two miles  the men
were much disheartened at the bad prospect of escaping from the
mountains  and having nothing to eat but a few berries which have made
several of them sick  they all passed a disagreeable night  which was
rendered more uncomfortable by a heavy dew 

sunday 25  the want of provisions urged captain clarke to return as soon
as possible  he therefore set out early  and halted an hour in passing
the indian camp near the fish weirs  these people treated them with
great kindness  and though poor and dirty they willingly give what
little they possess  they gave the whole party boiled salmon and dried
berries  which were not however in sufficient quantities to appease
their hunger  they soon resumed their old road  but as the abstinence or
strange diet had given one of the men a very severe illness  they were
detained very much on his account  and it was not till late in the day
they reached the cliff under which they had encamped on the
twenty first  they immediately began to fish and hunt  in order to
procure a meal  we caught several small fish  and by means of our guide 
obtained two salmon from a small party of women and children  who  with
one man  were going below to gather berries  this supplied us with about
half a meal  but after dark we were regaled with a beaver which one of
the hunters brought in  the other game seen in the course of the day
were one deer  and a party of elk among the pines on the sides of the
mountains 

monday 26  the morning was fine  and three men were despatched ahead to
hunt  while the rest were detained until nine o clock  in order to
retake some horses which had strayed away during the night  they then
proceeded along the route by the forks of the river  till they reached
the lower indian camp where they first were when we met them  the whole
camp immediately flocked around him with great appearance of cordiality 
but all the spare food of the village did not amount to more than two
salmon  which they gave to captain clarke  who distributed them among
his men  the hunters had not been able to kill any thing  nor had
captain clarke or the greater part of the men any food during the
twenty four hours  till towards evening one of them shot a salmon in the
river  and a few small fish were caught  which furnished them with a
scanty meal  the only animals they had seen were a few pigeons  some
very wild hares  a great number of the large black grasshopper  and a
quantify of ground lizards 

tuesday 27  the men  who were engaged last night in mending their
moccasins  all except one  went out hunting  but no game was to be
procured  one of the men however killed a small salmon  and the indians
made a present of another  on which the whole party made a very slight
breakfast  these indians  to whom this life is familiar  seem contented 
although they depend for subsistence on the scanty productions of the
fishery  but our men who are used to hardships  but have been accustomed
to have the first wants of nature regularly supplied  feel very sensibly
their wretched situation  their strength is wasting away  they begin to
express their apprehensions of being without food in a country perfectly
destitute of any means of supporting life  except a few fish  in the
course of the day an indian brought into the camp five salmon  two of
which captain clarke bought  and made a supper for the party 

wednesday 28  there was a frost again this morning  the indians gave
the party two salmon out of several which they caught in their traps 
and having purchased two more  the party was enabled to subsist on them
during the day  a camp of about forty indians from the west fork passed
us to day  on their route to the eastward  our prospect of provisions is
getting worse every day  the hunters who had ranged through the country
in every direction where game might be reasonably expected  have seen
nothing  the fishery is scarcely more productive  for an indian who was
out all day with his gig killed only one salmon  besides the four fish
procured from the indians  captain clarke obtained some fishroe in
exchange for three small fish hooks  the use of which he taught them 
and which they very readily comprehended  all the men who are not
engaged in hunting  are occupied in making pack saddles for the horses
which captain lewis informed us he had bought 

august 20  two hunters were despatched early in the morning  but they
returned without killing any thing  and the only game we procured was a
beaver  who was caught last night in a trap which he carried off two
miles before he was found  the fur of this animal is as good as any we
have ever seen  nor does it in fact appear to be ever out of season on
the upper branches of the missouri  this beaver  with several dozen of
fine trout  gave us a plentiful subsistence for the day  the party were
occupied chiefly in making pack saddles  in the manufacture of which we
supply the place of nails and boards  by substituting for the first
thongs of raw hide  which answer very well  and for boards we use the
handles of our oars  and the plank of some boxes  the contents of which
we empty into sacks of raw hides made for the purpose  the indians who
visit us behave with the greatest decorum  and the women are busily
engaged in making and mending the moccasins of the party  as we had
still some superfluous baggage which would be too heavy to carry across
the mountains  it became necessary to make a cache or deposit  for this
purpose we selected a spot on the bank of the river  three quarters of a
mile below the camp  and three men were set to dig it  with a sentinel
in the neighbourhood  who was ordered if the natives were to straggle
that way  to fire a signal for the workmen to desist and separate 
towards evening the cache was completed without being perceived by the
indians  and the packages prepared for deposit 




                               chapter xvi 

     contest between drewyer and a shoshonee  the fidelity and honour of
     that tribe  the party set out on their journey  the conduct of
     cameahwait reproved  and himself reconciled  the easy parturition
     of the shoshonee women  history of this nation  their terror of the
     pawkees  their government and family economy in their treatment of
     their women  their complaints of spanish treachery  description of
     their weapons of warfare  their curious mode of making a
     shield  the caparison of their horses  the dress of the men and of
     the women particularly described  their mode of acquiring new
     names 


wednesday  august 21  the weather was very cold  the water which stood
in the vessels exposed to the air being covered with ice a quarter of an
inch thick  the ink freezes in the pen  and the low grounds are
perfectly whitened with frost  after this the day proved excessively
warm  the party were engaged in their usual occupations  and completed
twenty saddles with the necessary harness  all prepared to set off as
soon as the indians should arrive  our two hunters who were despatched
early in the morning have not returned  so that we were obliged to
encroach on our pork and corn  which we consider as the last resource
when our casual supplies of game fail  after dark we carried our baggage
to the cache  and deposited what we thought too cumbrous to carry with
us  a small assortment of medicines  and all the specimens of plants 
seeds  and minerals  collected since leaving the falls of the missouri 
late at night drewyer  one of the hunters  returned with a fawn and a
considerable quantity of indian plunder  which he had taken by way of
reprisal  while hunting this morning in the shoshonee cove  he came
suddenly upon an indian camp  at which were an old man  a young one 
three women  and a boy  they showed no surprise at the sight of him and
he therefore rode up to them  and after turning his horse loose to
graze sat down and began to converse with them by signs  they had just
finished a repast on some roots  and in about twenty minutes one of the
women spoke to the rest of the party  who immediately went out 
collected their horses and began to saddle them  having rested himself 
drewyer thought that he would continue his hunt  and rising went to
catch his horse who was at a short distance  forgetting at the moment to
take up his rifle  he had scarcely gone more than fifty paces when the
indians mounted their horses  the young man snatched up the rifle  and
leaving all their baggage  whipt their horses  and set off at full speed
towards the passes of the mountains  drewyer instantly jumped on his
horse and pursued them  after running about ten miles the horses of the
women nearly gave out  and the women finding drewyer gain on them raised
dreadful cries  which induced the young man to slacken his pace  and
being mounted on a very fleet horse rode round them at a short distance 
drewyer now came up with the women  and by signs persuaded them that he
did not mean to hurt them  they then stopped  and as the young man came
towards them drewyer asked him for his rifle  but the only part of the
answer which he understood was pahkee  the name by which they call their
enemies  the minnetarees of fort de prairie  while they were thus
engaged in talking  drewyer watched his opportunity  and seeing the
indian off his guard  galloped up to him and seized his rifle  the
indian struggled for some time  but finding drewyer getting too strong
for him  had the presence of mind to open the pan and let the priming
fall out  he then let go his hold  and giving his horse the whip escaped
at full speed  leaving the women to the mercy of the conqueror  drewyer
then returned to where he had first seen them  where he found that their
baggage had been left behind  and brought it to camp with him 

thursday  22  this morning early two men were sent to complete the
covering of the cache  which could not be so perfectly done during the
night as to elude the search of the indians  on examining the spoils
which drewyer had obtained  they were found to consist of several
dressed and undressed skins  two bags wove with the bark of the silk
grass  each containing a bushel of dried serviceberries  and about the
same quantity of roots  an instrument made of bone for manufacturing the
flints into heads for arrows  and a number of flints themselves  these
were much of the same colour and nearly as transparent as common black
glass  and when cut detached itself into flakes  leaving a very sharp
edge 

the roots were of three kinds  and folded separate from each in hides of
buffaloe made into parchment  the first is a fusiform root six inches
long  and about the size of a man s finger at the largest end  with
radicles larger than is usual in roots of the fusiform sort  the rind is
white and thin  the body is also white  mealy  and easily reducible  by
pounding  to a substance resembling flour  like which it thickens by
boiling  and is of an agreeable flavour  it is eaten frequently in its
raw state either green or dried  the second species was much mutilated 
but appeared to be fibrous  it is of a cylindrical form about the size
of a small quill  hard and brittle  a part of the rind which had not
been detached in the preparation was hard and black  but the rest of the
root was perfectly white  this the indiana informed us was always boiled
before eating  and on making the experiment we found that it became
perfectly soft  but had a bitter taste  which was nauseous to our taste 
but which the indians seemed to relish  for on giving the roots to them
they were very heartily swallowed 

the third species was a small nut about the size of a nutmeg  of an
irregularly rounded form  something like the smallest of the jerusalem
artichokes  which  on boiling  we found them to resemble also in
flavour  and is certainly the best root we have seen in use among the
indians  on inquiring of the indians from what plant these roots were
procured  they informed us that none of them grew near this place 

the men were chiefly employed in dressing the skins belonging to the
party who accompanied captain clarke  about eleven o clock chaboneau and
his wife returned with cameahwait  accompanied by about fifty men with
their women and children  after they had encamped near us and turned
loose their horses  we called a council of all the chiefs and warriors
and addressed them in a speech  additional presents were then
distributed  particularly to the two second chiefs  who had agreeably to
their promises exerted themselves in our favour  the council was then
adjourned  and all the indians were treated with an abundant meal of
boiled indian corn and beans  the poor wretches  who had no animal food
and scarcely any thing but a few fish  had been almost starved  and
received this new luxury with great thankfulness  out of compliment to
the chief we gave him a few dried squashes which we had brought from the
mandans  and he declared it was the best food he had ever tasted except
sugar  a small lump of which he had received from his sister  he now
declared how happy they should all be to live in a country which
produced so many good things  and we told him that it would not be long
before the white men would put it in their power to live below the
mountains  where they might themselves cultivate all these kinds of food
instead of wandering in the mountains  he appeared to be much pleased
with this information  and the whole party being now in excellent temper
after their repast  we began our purchase of horses  we soon obtained
five very good ones on very reasonable terms  that is  by giving for
each merchandise which cost us originally about six dollars  we have
again to admire the perfect decency and propriety of their conduct  for
although so numerous  they do not attempt to crowd round our camp or
take any thing which they see lying about  and whenever they borrow
knives or kettles or any other article from the men  they return them
with great fidelity 

towards evening we formed a drag of bushes  and in about two hours
caught five hundred and twenty eight very good fish most of them large
trout  among them we observed for the first time ten or twelve trout of
a white or silvery colour  except on the back and head where they are of
a bluish cast  in appearance and shape they resemble exactly the
speckled trout  except that they are not quite so large  though the
scales are much larger  and the flavour equally good  the greater part
of the fish was distributed among the indians 

friday 28  our visitors seem to depend wholly on us for food  and as the
state of our provisions obliges us to be careful of our remaining stock
of corn and flour  this was an additional reason for urging our
departure  but cameahwait requested us to wait till the arrival of
another party of his nation who were expected to day  knowing that it
would be in vain to oppose his wish  we consented  and two hunters were
sent out with orders to go further up the southeast fork than they had
hitherto been  at the same time the chief was informed of the low state
of our provisions  and advised to send out his young men to hunt  this
he recommended them to do  and most of them set out  we then sunk our
canoes by means of stones to the bottom of the river  a situation which
better than any other secured them against the effects of the high
waters  and the frequent fires of the plains  the indians having
promised not to disturb them during our absence  a promise we believe
the more readily  as they are almost too lazy to take the trouble of
raising them for fire wood  we were desirous of purchasing some more
horses  but they declined selling any until we reached their camp in the
mountains  soon after starting the indian hunters discovered a mule
buck  and twelve of their horsemen pursued it  for four miles  we saw
the chase  which was very entertaining  and at length they rode it down
and killed it  this mule buck was the largest deer of any kind we have
seen  being nearly as large as a doe elk  besides this they brought in
another deer and three goats  but instead of a general distribution of
the meat  and such as we have hitherto seen among all tribes of indians 
we observed that some families had a large share  while others received
none  on inquiring of cameahwait the reason of this custom  he said that
meat among them was scarce  that each hunter reserved what he killed for
the use of himself and his own family  none of the rest having any claim
on what he chose to keep  our hunters returned soon after with two mule
deer and three common deer  three of which we distributed among the
families who had received none of the game of their own hunters  about
three o clock the expected party consisting of fifty men  women and
children arrived  we now learnt that most of the indians were on their
way down the valley towards the buffaloe country  and some anxiety to
accompany them appeared to prevail among those who had promised to
assist us in crossing the mountains  we ourselves were not without some
apprehension that they might leave us  but as they continued to say that
they would return with us nothing was said upon the subject  we were 
however  resolved to move early in the morning  and therefore despatched
two men to hunt in the cove and leave the game on the route we should
pass to morrow 

saturday 24  as the indians who arrived yesterday had a number of spare
horses  we thought it probable they might be willing to dispose of them 
and desired the chief to speak to them for that purpose  they declined
giving any positive answer  but requested to see the goods which we
proposed to exchange  we then produced some battle axes which we had
made at fort mandan  and a quantity of knives  with both of which they
appeared very much pleased  and we were soon able to purchase three
horses by giving for each an axe  a knife  a hankerchief and a little
paint  to this we were obliged to add a second knife  a shirt  a
handkerchief and a pair of leggings  and such is the estimation in which
those animals are held  that even at this price  which was double that
for a horse  the fellow who sold him took upon himself great merit in
having given away a mule to us  they now said that they had no more
horses for sale  and as we had now nine of our own  two hired horses 
and a mule  we began loading them as heavily as was prudent  and placing
the rest on the shoulders of the indian women  left our camp at twelve
o clock  we were all on foot  except sacajawea  for whom her husband had
purchased a horse with some articles which we gave him for that purpose 
an indian however had the politeness to offer captain lewis one of his
horses to ride  which he accepted in order better to direct the march of
the party  we crossed the river below the forks  directing our course
towards the cove by the route already passed  and had just reached the
lower part of the cove when an indian rode up to captain lewis to inform
him that one of his men was very sick  and unable to come on  the party
was immediately halted at a run which falls into the creek on the left 
and captain lewis rode back two miles  and found wiser severely
afflicted with the colic  by giving him some of the essence of
peppermint and laudanum  he recovered sufficiently to ride the horse of
captain lewis  who then rejoined the party on foot  when he arrived he
found that the indians who had been impatiently expecting his return  at
last unloaded their horses and turned them loose  and had now made their
camp for the night  it would have been fruitless to remonstrate  and not
prudent to excite any irritation  and therefore  although the sun was
still high  and we had made only six miles  we thought it best to remain
with them  after we had encamped there fell a slight shower of rain  one
of the men caught several fine trout  but drewyer had been sent out to
hunt without having killed any thing  we therefore gave a little corn to
those of the indians who were actually engaged in carrying our baggage 
and who had absolutely nothing to eat  we also advised cameahwait  as we
could not supply all his people with provisions  to recommend to all who
were not assisting us  to go on before us to their camp  this he did 
but in the morning 

sunday 25  a few only followed his advice  the rest accompanying us at
some distance on each side  we set out at sunrise and after going
seventeen miles halted for dinner within two miles of the narrow pass in
the mountains  the indians who were on the sides of our party had
started some antelopes  but were obliged after a pursuit of several
hours to abandon the chase  our hunters had in the meantime brought in
three deer  the greater part of which was distributed among the indians 
whilst at dinner we learnt by means of sacajawea  that the young men who
left us this morning  carried a request from the chief  that the village
would break up its encampment and meet this party to morrow  when they
would all go down the missouri into the buffaloe country  alarmed at
this new caprice of the indians which  if not counteracted  threatened
to leave ourselves and our baggage on the mountains  or even if we
reached the waters of the columbia  prevent our obtaining horses to go
on further  captain lewis immediately called the three chiefs together 
after smoking a pipe he asked them if they were men of their words  and
if we can rely on their promises  they readily answered in the
affirmative  he then asked  if they had not agreed to assist us in
carrying our baggage over the mountains  to this they also answered yes 
and why then  said he  have you requested your people to meet us
to morrow  where it will be impossible for us to trade for horses  as
you promised we should  if  he continued  you had not promised to help
us in transporting our goods over the mountains  we should not have
attempted it  but have returned down the river  after which no white men
would ever have come into your country  if you wish the whites to be
your friends  and to bring you arms and protect you from your enemies 
you should never promise what you do not mean to perform  when i first
met you  you doubted what i said  yet you afterwards saw that i told
you the truth  how therefore can you doubt what i now tell you  you see
that i have divided amongst you the meat which my hunters kill  and i
promise to give all who assist us a share of whatever we have to eat  if
therefore you intend to keep your promise  send one of the young men
immediately to order the people to remain at the village till we arrive 

the two inferior chiefs then said  that they had wished to keep their
words and to assist us  that they had not sent for the people  but on
the contrary had disapproved of the measure which was done wholly by the
first chief  cameahwait remained silent for some time  at last he said
that he knew he had done wrong  but that seeing his people all in want
of provisions  he had wished to hasten their departure for the country
where their wants might be supplied  he however now declared  that
having passed his word he would never violate it  and counter orders
were immediately sent to the village by a young man  to whom we gave a
handkerchief in order to ensure despatch and fidelity 

this difficulty being now adjusted  our march was resumed with an
unusual degree of alacrity on the part of the indians  we passed a spot 
where six years ago the shoshonees  suffered a very severe defeat from
the minnetarees  and late in the evening we reached the upper part of
the cove where the creek enters the mountains  the part of the cove on
the northeast side of the creek has lately been burnt  most probably as
a signal on some occasion  here we were joined by our hunters with a
single deer  which captain lewis gave  as a proof of his sincerity  to
the women and children  and remained supperless himself  as we came
along we observed several large hares  some ducks  and many of the cock
of the plains  in the low grounds of the cove were also considerable
quantities of wild onions 

monday 26  the morning was excessively cold  and the ice in our vessels
was nearly a quarter of an inch in thickness  we set out at sunrise  and
soon reached the fountain of the missouri  where we halted for a few
minutes  and then crossing the dividing ridge reached the fine spring
where captain lewis had slept on the 12th in his first excursion to the
shoshonee camp  the grass on the hill sides is perfectly dry and parched
by the sun  but near the spring was a fine green grass  we therefore
halted for dinner and turned our horses to graze  to each of the indians
who were engaged in carrying our baggage was distributed a pint of corn 
which they parched  then pounded  and made a sort of soup  one of the
women who had been leading two of our pack horses halted at a rivulet
about a mile behind  and sent on the two horses by a female friend  on
inquiring of cameahwait the cause of her detention  he answered with
great appearance of unconcern  that she had just stopped to lie in  but
would soon overtake us  in fact we were astonished to see her in about
an hour s time come on with her new born infant and pass us on her way
to the camp  apparently in perfect health 

this wonderful facility with which the indian women bring forth their
children  seems rather some benevolent gift of nature  in exempting them
from pains which their savage state would render doubly grievous  than
any result of habit  if as has been imagined  a pure dry air or a cold
and elevated country are obstacles to easy delivery  every difficulty
incident to that operation might be expected in this part of the
continent  nor can another reason  the habit of carrying heavy burthens
during pregnancy  be at all applicable to the shoshonee women  who
rarely carry any burdens  since their nation possesses an abundance of
horses  we have indeed been several times informed by those conversant
with indian manners  and who asserted their knowledge of the fact  that
indian women pregnant by white men experience more difficulty in
child birth than when the father is an indian  if this account be true 
it may contribute to strengthen the belief  that the easy delivery of
the indian women is wholly constitutional 

the tops of the high irregular mountains to the westward are still
entirely covered with snow  and the coolness which the air acquires in
passing them  is a very agreeable relief from the heat  which has dried
up the herbage on the sides of the hills  while we stopped  the women
were busily employed in collecting the root of a plant with which they
feed their children  who like their mothers are nearly half starved and
in a wretched condition  it is a species of fennel which grows in the
moist grounds  the radix is of the knob kind  of a long ovate form 
terminating in a single radicle  the whole being three or four inches
long  and the thickest part about the size of a man s little finger 
when fresh  it is white  firm  and crisp  and when dried and pounded
makes a fine white meal  its flavour is not unlike that of aniseed 
though less pungent  from one to four of these knobbed roots are
attached to a single stem which rises to the height of three or four
feet  and is jointed  smooth  cylindric  and has several small
peduncles  one at each joint above the sheathing leaf  its colour is a
deep green  as is also that of the leaf  which is sheathing  sessile 
and  polipartite   the divisions being long and narrow  the flowers 
which are now in bloom  are small and numerous  with white and
umbellifferous petals  there are no root leaves  as soon as the seeds
have matured  the roots of the present year as well as the stem decline 
and are renewed in the succeeding spring from the little knot which
unites the roots  the sunflower is also abundant here  and the seeds 
which are now ripe  are gathered in considerable quantities  and after
being pounded and rubbed between smooth stones  form a kind of meal 
which is a favourite dish among the indians 

after dinner we continued our route and were soon met by a party of
young men on horseback  who turned with us and went to the village  as
soon as we were within sight of it  cameahwait requested that we would
discharge our guns  the men were therefore drawn up in a single rank 
and gave a running fire of two rounds  to the great satisfaction of the
indians  we then proceeded to the encampment where we arrived about six
o clock  and were conducted to the leathern lodge in the centre of
thirty two others made of brush  the baggage was arranged near this
tent  which captain lewis occupied  and surrounded by those of the men
so as to secure it from pillage  this camp was in a beautiful smooth
meadow near the river  and about three miles above their camp when we
first visited the indians  we here found colter  who had been sent by
captain clarke with a note apprising us that there were no hopes of a
passage by water  and that the most practicable route seemed to be that
mentioned by his guide  towards the north  whatever road we meant to
take  it was now necessary to provide ourselves with horses  we
therefore informed cameahwait of our intention of going to the great
river beyond the mountains  and that we would wish to purchase twenty
more horses  he said the minnetarees had stolen a great number of their
horses this spring  but he still hoped they could spare us that number 
in order not to loose the present favourable moment  and to keep the
indians as cheerful as possible  the violins were brought out and our
men danced to the great diversion of the indians  this mirth was the
more welcome because our situation was not precisely that which would
most dispose us for gayety  for we have only a little parched corn to
eat  and our means of subsistence or of success  depend on the wavering
temper of the natives  who may change their minds to morrow 

the shoshonees are a small tribe of the nation called snake indians  a
vague denomination  which embraces at once the inhabitants of the
southern parts of the rocky mountains and of the plains on each side 
the shoshonees with whom we now are  amount to about one hundred
warriors  and three times that number of women and children  within
their own recollection they formerly lived in the plains  but they have
been driven into the mountains by the pawkees  or the roving indians of
the sascatchawain  and are now obliged to visit occasionally  and by
stealth  the country of their ancestors  their lives are indeed
migratory  from the middle of may to the beginning of september  they
reside on the waters of the columbia  where they consider themselves
perfectly secure from the pawkees who have never yet found their way to
that retreat  during this time they subsist chiefly on salmon  and as
that fish disappears on the approach of autumn  they are obliged to seek
subsistence elsewhere  they then cross the ridge to the waters of the
missouri  down which they proceed slowly and cautiously  till they are
joined near the three forks by other bands  either of their own nation
or of the flatheads  with whom they associate against the common enemy 
being now strong in numbers  they venture to hunt buffaloe in the plains
eastward of the mountains  near which they spend the winter  till the
return of the salmon invites them to the columbia  but such is their
terror of the pawkees  that as long as they can obtain the scantiest
subsistence  they do not leave the interior of the mountains  and as
soon as they collect a large stock of dried meat  they again retreat 
and thus alternately obtaining their food at the hazard of their lives 
and hiding themselves to consume it  in this loose and wandering
existence they suffer the extremes of want  for two thirds of the year
they are forced to live in the mountains  passing whole weeks without
meat  and with nothing to eat but a few fish and roots  nor can any
thing be imagined more wretched than their condition at the present
time  when the salmon is fast retiring  when roots are becoming scarce 
and they have not yet acquired strength to hazard an encounter with
their enemies  so insensible are they however to these calamities  that
the shoshonees are not only cheerful but even gay  and their character 
which is more interesting than that of any indians we have seen  has in
it much of the dignity of misfortune  in their intercourse with
strangers they are frank and communicative  in their dealings perfectly
fair  nor have we had during our stay with them  any reason to suspect
that the display of all our new and valuable wealth  has tempted them
into a single act of dishonesty  while they have generally shared with
us the little they possess  they have always abstained from begging any
thing from us  with their liveliness of temper  they are fond of gaudy
dresses  and of all sorts of amusements  particularly to games of
hazard  and like most indians fond of boasting of their own warlike
exploits  whether real or fictitious  in their conduct towards
ourselves  they were kind and obliging  and though on one occasion they
seemed willing to neglect us  yet we scarcely knew how to blame the
treatment by which we suffered  when we recollected how few civilized
chiefs would have hazarded the comforts or the subsistence of their
people for the sake of a few strangers  this manliness of character may
cause or it may be formed by the nature of their government  which is
perfectly free from any restraint  each individual is his own master 
and the only control to which his conduct is subjected  is the advice of
a chief supported by his influence over the opinions of the rest of the
tribe  the chief himself is in fact no more than the most confidential
person among the warriors  a rank neither distinguished by any external
honor  nor invested by any ceremony  but gradually acquired from the
good wishes of his companions and by superior merit  such an officer has
therefore strictly no power  he may recommend or advise or influence 
but his commands have no effect on those who incline to disobey  and who
may at any time withdraw from their voluntary allegiance  his shadowy
authority which cannot survive the confidence which supports it  often
decays with the personal vigour of the chief  or is transferred to some
more fortunate or favourite hero 

in their domestic economy  the man is equally sovereign  the man is the
sole proprietor of his wives and daughters  and can barter them away  or
dispose of them in any manner he may think proper  the children are
seldom corrected  the boys  particularly  soon become their own
masters  they are never whipped  for they say that it breaks their
spirit  and that after being flogged they never recover their
independence of mind  even when they grow to manhood  a plurality of
wives is very common  but these are not generally sisters  as among the
minnetarees and mandans  but are purchased of different fathers  the
infant daughters are often betrothed by the father to men who are grown 
either for themselves or for their sons  for whom they are desirous of
providing wives  the compensation to the father is usually made in
horses or mules  and the girl remains with her parents till the age of
puberty  which is thirteen or fourteen  when she is surrendered to her
husband  at the same time the father often makes a present to the
husband equal to what he had formerly received as the price of his
daughter  though this return is optional with her parent  sacajawea had
been contracted in this way before she was taken prisoner  and when we
brought her back  her betrothed was still living  although he was double
the age of sacajawea  and had two other wives  he claimed her  but on
finding that she had a child by her new husband  chaboneau  he
relinquished his pretensions and said he did not want her 

the chastity of the women does not appear to be held in much estimation 
the husband will for a trifling present lend his wife for a night to a
stranger  and the loan may be protracted by increasing the value of the
present  yet strange as it may seem  notwithstanding this facility  any
connexion of this kind not authorized by the husband  is considered
highly offensive and quite as disgraceful to his character as the same
licentiousness in civilized societies  the shoshonees are not so
importunate in volunteering the services of their wives as we found the
sioux were  and indeed we observed among them some women who appeared to
be held in more respect than those of any nation we had seen  but the
mass of the females are condemned  as among all savage nations  to the
lowest and most laborious drudgery  when the tribe is stationary  they
collect the roots  and cook  they build the huts  dress the skins and
make clothing  collect the wood  and assist in taking care of the horses
on the route  they load the horses and have the charge of all the
baggage  the only business of the man is to fight  he therefore takes on
himself the care of his horse  the companion of his warfare  but he will
descend to no other labour than to hunt and to fish  he would consider
himself degraded by being compelled to walk any distance  and were he so
poor as to possess only two horses  he would ride the best of them  and
leave the other for his wives and children and their baggage  and if he
has too many wives or too much baggage for the horse  the wives have no
alternative but to follow him on foot  they are not however often
reduced to those extremities  for their stock of horses is very ample 
notwithstanding their losses this spring they still have at least seven
hundred  among which are about forty colts  and half that number of
mules  there are no horses here which can be considered as wild  we have
seen two only on this side of the muscleshell river which were without
owners  and even those although shy  showed every mark of having been
once in the possession of man  the original stock was procured from the
spaniards  but they now raise their own  the horses are generally very
fine  of a good size  vigorous and patient of fatigue as well as hunger 
each warrior has one or two tied to a stake near his hut both day and
night  so as to be always prepared for action  the mules are obtained in
the course of trade from the spaniards  with whose brands several of
them are marked  or stolen from them by the frontier indians  they are
the finest animals of that kind we have ever seen  and at this distance
from the spanish colonies are very highly valued  the worst are
considered as worth the price of two horses  and a good mule cannot be
obtained for less than three and sometimes four horses 

we also saw a bridle bit  stirrups and several other articles which 
like the mules  came from the spanish colonies  the shoshonees say that
they can reach those settlements in ten days  march by the route of the
yellowstone river  but we readily perceive that the spaniards are by no
means favourites  they complain that the spaniards refuse to let them
have fire arms under pretence that these dangerous weapons will only
induce them to kill each other  in the meantime  say the shoshonees  we
are left to the mercy of the minnetarees  who having arms  plunder them
of their horses  and put them to death without mercy   but this should
not be   said cameahwait fiercely   if we had guns  instead of hiding
ourselves in the mountains and living like the bears on roots and
berries  we would then go down and live in the buffaloe country in spite
of our enemies  whom we never fear when we meet on equal terms  

as war is the chief occupation  bravery is the first virtue among the
shoshonees  none can hope to be distinguished without having given
proofs of it  nor can there be any preferment  or influence among the
nation  without some warlike achievement  those important events which
give reputation to a warrior  and which entitle him to a new name  are
killing a white bear  stealing individually the horses of the enemy 
leading out a party who happen to be successful either in plundering
horses or destroying the enemy  and lastly scalping a warrior  these
acts seem of nearly equal dignity  but the last  that of taking an
enemy s scalp  is an honour quite independent of the act of vanquishing
him  to kill your adversary is of no importance unless the scalp is
brought from the field of battle  and were a warrior to slay any number
of his enemies in action  and others were to obtain the scalps or first
touch the dead  they would have all the honours  since they have borne
off the trophy 

although thus oppressed by the minnetarees  the shoshonees are still a
very military people  their cold and rugged country inures them to
fatigue  their long abstinence makes them support the dangers of
mountain warfare  and worn down as we saw them  by want of sustenance 
have a look of fierce and adventurous courage  the shoshonee warrior
always fights on horseback  he possesses a few bad guns  which are
reserved exclusively for war  but his common arms are the bow and arrow 
a shield  a lance and a weapon called by the chippeways  by whom it was
formerly used  the poggamoggon  the bow is made of cedar or pine covered
on the outer side with sinews and glue  it is about two and a half feet
long  and does not differ in shape from those used by the sioux  mandans
and minnetarees  sometimes  however  the bow is made of a single piece
of the horn of an elk  covered on the back like those of wood with
sinews and glue  and occasionally ornamented by a strand wrought of
porcupine quills and sinews  which is wrapped round the horn near its
two ends  the bows made of the horns of the bighorn  are still more
prized  and are formed by cementing with glue flat pieces of the horn
together  covering the back with sinews and glue  and loading the whole
with an unusual quantity of ornaments  the arrows resemble those of the
other indians except in being more slender than any we have seen  they
are contained  with the implements for striking fire  in a narrow quiver
formed of different kinds of skin  though that of the otter seems to be
preferred  it is just long enough to protect the arrows from the
weather  and is worn on the back by means of a strap passing over the
right shoulder and under the left arm  the shield is a circular piece of
buffaloe hide about two feet four or five inches in diameter  ornamented
with feathers  and a fringe round it of dressed leather  and adorned or
deformed with paintings of strange figures  the buffaloe hide is
perfectly proof against any arrow  but in the minds of the shoshonees 
its power to protect them is chiefly derived from the virtues which are
communicated to it by the old men and jugglers  to make a shield is
indeed one of their most important ceremonies  it begins by a feast to
which all the warriors  old men and jugglers are invited  after the
repast a hole is dug in the ground about eighteen inches in depth and of
the same diameter as the intended shield  into this hole red hot stones
are thrown and water poured over them  till they emit a very strong  hot
steam  the buffaloe skin  which must be the entire hide of a male two
years old  and never suffered to dry since it was taken from the animal 
is now laid across the hole  with the fleshy side to the ground  and
stretched in every direction by as many as can take hold of it  as the
skin becomes heated  the hair separates and is taken off by the hand 
till at last the skin is contracted into the compass designed for
the shield  it is then taken off and placed on a hide prepared into
parchment  and then pounded during the rest of the festival by the bare
heels of those who are invited to it  this operation sometimes continues
for several days  after which it is delivered to the proprietor  and
declared by the old men and jugglers to be a security against arrows 
and provided the feast has been satisfactory  against even the bullets
of their enemies  such is the delusion  that many of the indians
implicitly believe that this ceremony has given to the shield
supernatural powers  and that they have no longer to fear any weapons of
their enemies 

the paggamoggon is an instrument  consisting of a handle twenty two
inches long  made of wood  covered with dressed leather about the size
of a whip handle  at one end is a thong of two inches in length  which
is tied to a round stone weighing two pounds and held in a cover of
leather  at the other end is a loop of the same material  which is
passed round the wrist so as to secure the hold of the instrument  with
which they strike a very severe blow 

besides these  they have a kind of armour something like a coat of mail 
which is formed by a great many folds of dressed antelope skins  united
by means of a mixture of glue and sand  with this they cover their own
bodies and those of their horses  and find it impervious to the arrow 

the caparison of their horses is a halter and a saddle  the first
is either a rope of six or seven strands of buffaloe hair platted
or twisted together  about the size of a man s finger and of great
strength  or merely a thong of raw hide  made pliant by pounding and
rubbing  though the first kind is much preferred  the halter is very
long  and is never taken from the neck of the horse when in constant
use  one end of it is first tied round the neck in a knot and then
brought down to the under jaw  round which it is formed into a simple
noose  passing through the mouth  it is then drawn up on the right side
and held by the rider in his left hand  while the rest trails after him
to some distance  at other times the knot is formed at a little distance
from one of the ends  so as to let that end serve as a bridle  while the
other trails on the ground  with these cords dangling along side of them
the horse is put to his full speed without fear of falling  and when he
is turned to graze the noose is merely taken from his mouth  the saddle
in formed like the pack saddles used by the french and spaniards  of two
flat thin boards which fit the sides of the horse  and are kept together
by two cross pieces  one before and the other behind  which rise to
a considerable height  ending sometimes in a flat point extending
outwards  and always making the saddle deep and narrow  under this a
piece of buffaloe skin  with the hair on  is placed so as to prevent the
rubbing of the boards  and when they mount they throw a piece of skin
or robe over the saddle  which has no permanent cover  when stirrups
are used  they consist of wood covered with leather  but stirrups and
saddles are conveniences reserved for old men and women  the young
warriors rarely use any thing except a small leather pad stuffed with
hair  and secured by a girth made of a leathern thong  in this way
they ride with great expertness  and they have a particular dexterity
in catching the horse when he is running at large  if he will not
immediately submit when they wish to take him  they make a noose in
the rope  and although the horse may be at a distance  or even running 
rarely fail to fix it on his neck  and such is the docility of the
animal  that however unruly he may seem  he surrenders as soon as he
feels the rope on him  this cord is so useful in this way that it is
never dispensed with  even when they use the spanish bridle  which they
prefer  and always procure when they have it in their power  the horse
becomes almost an object of attachment  a favourite is frequently
painted and his ears cut into various shapes  the mane and tail  which
are never drawn nor trimmed  are decorated with feathers of birds  and
sometimes a warrior suspends at the breast of his horse the finest
ornaments he possesses 

thus armed and mounted the shoshonee is a formidable enemy  even with
the feeble weapons which he is still obliged to use  when they attack at
full speed they bend forward and cover their bodies with the shield 
while with the right hand they shoot under the horses neck 

the only articles of metal which the shoshonees possess are a few bad
knives  some brass kettles  some bracelets or armbands of iron and
brass  a few buttons worn as ornaments in their hair  one or two spears
about a foot in length  and some heads for arrows made of iron and
brass  all these they had obtained in trading with the crow or rocky
mountain indians  who live on the yellowstone  the few bridle bits and
stirrups they procured from the spanish colonies 

the instrument which supplies the place of a knife among them  is a
piece of flint with no regular form  and the sharp part of it not more
than one or two inches long  the edge of this is renewed  and the flint
itself is formed into heads for arrows  by means of the point of a deer
or elk horn  an instrument which they use with great art and ingenuity 
there are no axes or hatchets  all the wood being cut with flint or
elk horn  the latter of which is always used as a wedge in splitting
wood  their utensils consist  besides the brass kettles  of pots in the
form of a jar  made either of earth  or of a stone found in the hills
between madison and jefferson rivers  which  though soft and white in
its natural state  becomes very hard and black after exposure to the
fire  the horns of the buffaloe and the bighorn supply them with spoons 

the fire is always kindled by means of a blunt arrow  and a piece of
well seasoned wood of a soft spongy kind  such as the willow or
cottonwood 

the shoshonees are of a diminutive stature  with thick flat feet and
ankles  crooked legs  and are  generally speaking  worse formed than any
nation of indians we have seen  their complexion resembles that of the
sioux  and is darker than that of the minnetarees  mandans  or shawnees 
the hair in both sexes is suffered to fall loosely over the face and
down the shoulders  some men  however  divide it by means of thongs of
dressed leather or otter skin into two equal queues  which hang over the
ears and are drawn in front of the body  but at the present moment  when
the nation is afflicted by the loss of so many relations killed in war 
most of them have the hair cut quite short in the neck  and cameahwait
has the hair cut short all over his head  this being the customary
mourning for a deceased kindred 

the dress of the men consists of a robe  a tippet  a shirt  long
leggings and moccasins  the robe is formed most commonly of the skins of
antelope  bighorn  or deer  though when it can be procured  the buffaloe
hide is preferred  sometimes too they are made of beaver  moonax  and
small wolves  and frequently during the summer of elk skin  these are
dressed with the hair on  and reach about as low as the middle of the
leg  they are worn loosely over the shoulders  the sides being at
pleasure either left open or drawn together by the hand  and in cold
weather kept close by a girdle round the waist  this robe answers the
purpose of a cloak during the day  and at night is their only covering 

the tippet is the most elegant article of indian dress we have ever
seen  the neck or collar of it is a strip about four or five inches
wide  cut from the back of the otter skin  the nose and eyes forming one
extremity  and the tail another  this being dressed with the fur on 
they attach to one edge of it  from one hundred to two hundred and fifty
little rolls of ermine skin  beginning at the ear  and proceeding
towards the tail  these ermine skins are the same kind of narrow strips
from the back of that animal  which are sewed round a small cord of
twisted silkgrass thick enough to make the skin taper towards the tail
which hangs from the end  and are generally about the size of a large
quill  these are tied at the head into little bundles  of two  three or
more according to the caprice of the wearer  and then suspended from the
collar  and a broad fringe of ermine skin is fixed so as to cover the
parts where they unite  which might have a coarse appearance  little
tassels of fringe of the same materials are also fastened to the
extremities of the tail  so as to show its black colour to greater
advantage  the centre of the collar is further ornamented with the
shells of the pearl oyster  thus adorned  the collar is worn close round
the neck  and the little rolls fall down over the shoulders nearly to
the waist  so as to form a sort of short cloak  which has a very
handsome appearance  these tippets are very highly esteemed  and are
given or disposed of on important occasions only  the ermine is the fur
known to the northwest traders by the name of the white weasel  but is
the genuine ermine  and by encouraging the indians to take them  might
no doubt be rendered a valuable branch of trade  these animals must be
very abundant  for the tippets are in great numbers  and the
construction of each requires at least one hundred skins 

the shirt is a covering of dressed skin without the hair  and formed of
the hide of the antelope  deer  bighorn  or elk  though the last is
more rarely used than any other for this purpose  it fits the body
loosely  and reaches half way down the thigh  the aperture at the top is
wide enough to admit the head  and has no collar  but is either left
square  or most frequently terminates in the tail of the animal  which
is left entire  so as to fold outwards  though sometimes the edges are
cut into a fringe  and ornamented with quills of the porcupine  the
seams of the shirt are on the sides  and are richly fringed and adorned
with porcupine quills  till within five or six inches of the sleeve 
where it is left open  as is also the under side of the sleeve from the
shoulder to the elbow  where it fits closely round the arm as low as the
wrist  and has no fringe like the sides  and the under part of the
sleeve above the elbow  it is kept up by wide shoulder straps  on which
the manufacturer displays his taste by the variety of figures wrought
with porcupine quills of different colours  and sometimes by beads when
they can be obtained  the lower end of the shirt retains the natural
shape of the fore legs and neck of the skin  with the addition of a
slight fringe  the hair too is left on the tail and near the hoofs  part
of which last is retained and split into a fringe 

the leggings are generally made of antelope skins  dressed without the
hair  and with the legs  tail and neck hanging to them  each legging is
formed of a skin nearly entire  and reaches from the ancle to the upper
part of the thigh  and the legs of the skin are tucked before and behind
under a girdle round the waist  it fits closely to the leg  the tail
being worn upwards  and the neck highly ornamented with fringe and
porcupine quills  drags on the ground behind the heels  as the legs of
the animal are tied round the girdle  the wide part of the skin is drawn
so high as to conceal the parts usually kept from view  in which respect
their dress is much more decent than that of any nation of indians on
the missouri  the seams of the leggings down the sides  are also fringed
and ornamented  and occasionally decorated with tufts of hair taken
from enemies whom they have slain  in making all these dresses  their
only thread is the sinew taken from the backs and loins of deer  elk 
buffaloe  or any other animal 

the moccasin is of the deer  elk  or buffaloe skin  dressed without the
hair  though in winter they use the buffaloe skin with the hairy side
inward  as do most of the indians who inhabit the buffaloe country  like
the mandan moccasin  it is made with a single seam on the outer edge 
and sewed up behind  a hole being left at the instep to admit the foot 
it is variously ornamented with figures wrought with porcupine quills 
and sometimes the young men most fond of dress  cover it with the skin
of a polecat  and trail at their heels the tail of the animal 

the dress of the women consists of the same articles as that of their
husbands  the robe though smaller is worn in the same way  the moccasins
are precisely similar  the shirt or chemise reaches half way down the
leg  is in the same form  except that there is no shoulder strap  the
seam coming quite up to the shoulder  though for women who give suck
both sides are open  almost down to the waist  it is also ornamented in
the same way with the addition of little patches of red cloth  edged
round with beads at the skirts  the chief ornament is over the breast 
where there are curious figures made with the usual luxury of porcupine
quills  like the men they have a girdle round the waist  and when either
sex wishes to disengage the arm  it is drawn up through the hole near
the shoulder  and the lower part of the sleeve thrown behind the body 

children alone wear beads round their necks  grown persons of both sexes
prefer them suspended in little bunches from the ear  and sometimes
intermixed with triangular pieces of the shell of the pearl oyster 
sometimes the men tie them in the same way to the hair of the forepart
of the head  and increase the beauty of it by adding the wings and tails
of birds  and particularly the feathers of the great eagle or calumet
bird  of which they are extremely fond  the collars are formed either of
sea shells procured from their relations to the southwest  or of the
sweet scented grass which grows in the neighbourhood  and which they
twist or plait together  to the thickness of a man s finger  and then
cover with porcupine quills of various colours  the first of these is
worn indiscriminately by both sexes  the second principally confined to
the men  while a string of elk s tusks is a collar almost peculiar to
the women and children  another collar worn by the men is a string of
round bones like the joints of a fish s back  but the collar most
preferred  because most honourable  is one of the claws of the brown
bear  to kill one of these animals is as distinguished an achievement as
to have put to death an enemy  and in fact with their weapons is a more
dangerous trial of courage  these claws are suspended on a thong of
dressed leather  and being ornamented with beads  are worn round the
neck by the warriors with great pride  the men also frequently wear the
skin of a fox  or a strip of otter skin round the head in the form of a
bandeau 

in short  the dress of the shoshonees is as convenient and decent as
that of any indians we have seen 

they have many more children than might have been expected  considering
their precarious means of support and their wandering life  this
inconvenience is however balanced by the wonderful facility with which
their females undergo the operations of child birth  in the most
advanced state of pregnancy they continue their usual occupations  which
are scarcely interrupted longer than the mere time of bringing the child
into the world 

the old men are few in number and do not appear to be treated with much
tenderness or respect 

the tobacco used by the shoshonees is not cultivated among them  but
obtained from the indians of the rocky mountains  and from some of the
bands of their own nation who live south of them  it is the same plant
which is in use among the minnetarees  mandans  and ricaras 

their chief intercourse with other nations seems to consist in their
association with other snake indians  and with the flatheads when they
go eastward to hunt buffaloe  and in the occasional visits made by the
flatheads to the waters of the columbia for the purpose of fishing 
their intercourse with the spaniards is much more rare  and it furnishes
them with a few articles  such as mules  and some bridles  and other
ornaments for horses  which  as well as some of their kitchen utensils 
are also furnished by the bands of snake indians from the yellowstone 
the pearl ornaments which they esteem so highly come from other bands 
whom they represent as their friends and relations  living to the
southwest beyond the barren plains on the other side of the mountains 
these relations they say inhabit a good country  abounding with elk 
deer  bear  and antelope  where horses and mules are much more abundant
than they are here  or to use their own expression  as numerous as the
grass of the plains 

the names of the indians varies in the course of their life  originally
given in childhood  from the mere necessity of distinguishing objects 
or from some accidental resemblance to external objects  the young
warrior is impatient to change it by some achievement of his own  any
important event  the stealing of horses  the scalping an enemy  or
killing a brown bear  entitles him at once to a new name which he then
selects for himself  and it is confirmed by the nation  sometimes the
two names subsist together  thus  the chief cameahwait  which means 
 one who never walks   has the war name of tooettecone  or  black gun  
which he acquired when he first signalized himself  as each new action
gives a warrior a right to change his name  many of them have had
several in the course of their lives  to give to a friend his own name
is an act of high courtesy  and a pledge like that of pulling off the
moccasin of sincerity and hospitality  the chief in this way gave his
name to captain clarke when he first arrived  and he was afterwards
known among the shoshonees by the name of cameahwait 

the diseases incident to this state of life may be supposed to be few 
and chiefly the result of accidents  we were particularly anxious to
ascertain whether they had any knowledge of the venereal disorder  after
inquiring by means of the interpreter and his wife  we learnt that they
sometimes suffered from it  and that they most usually die with it  nor
could we discover what was their remedy  it is possible that this
disease may have reached them in their circuitous communications with
the whites through the intermediate indians  but the situation of the
shoshonees is so insulated  that it is not probable that it could have
reached them in that way  and the existence of such a disorder among the
rocky mountains seems rather a proof of its being aboriginal 




                               chapter xvii 

     the party  after procuring horses from the shoshonees  proceed on
     their journey through the mountains  the difficulties and dangers
     of the route  a council held with another band of the shoshonees 
     of whom some account is given  they are reduced to the necessity of
     killing their horses for food  captain clarke with a small party
     precedes the main body in quest of food  and is hospitably received
     by the pierced nose indians  arrival of the main body amongst this
     tribe  with whom a council is held  they resolve to perform the
     remainder of their journey in canoes  sickness of the party  they
     descend the kooskooskee to its junction with lewis river  after
     passing several dangerous rapids  short description of the manners
     and dress of the pierced nose indians 


august 27  we were now occupied in determining our route and procuring
horses from the indians  the old guide who had been sent on by captain
clarke  now confirmed  by means of our interpreter  what he had already
asserted  of a road up berry creek which would lead to indian
establishments on another branch of the columbia  his reports however
were contradicted by all the shoshonees  this representation we ascribed
to a wish on their part to keep us with them during the winter  as well
for the protection we might afford against their enemies  as for the
purpose of consuming our merchandise amongst them  and as the old man
promised to conduct us himself  that route seemed to be the most
eligible  we were able to procure some horses  though not enough for all
our purposes  this traffic  and our inquiries and councils with the
indians  consumed the remainder of the day 

august 28  the purchase of horses was resumed  and our stock raised to
twenty two  having now crossed more than once the country which
separates the head waters of the missouri from those of the columbia  we
can designate the easiest and most expeditious route for a portage  it
is as follows 

from the forks of the river north 60 degrees west  five miles to the
point of a hill on the right  then south 80 degrees west  ten miles to a
spot where the creek is ten miles wide  and the highlands approach
within two hundred yards  southwest five miles to a narrow part of the
bottom  then turning south 70 degrees west  two miles to a creek on the
right  thence south 80 degrees west  three miles to a rocky point
opposite to a thicket of pines on the left  from that place west  three
miles to the gap where is the fountain of the missouri  on leaving this
fountain south 80 degrees west  six miles across the dividing ridge  to
a run from the right passing several small streams north 80 degrees
west  four miles over hilly ground to the east fork of lewis s river 
which is here forty yards wide 

thursday 29  captain clarke joined us this morning  and we continued our
bargains for horses  the late misfortunes of the shoshonees make the
price higher than common  so that one horse cost a pistol  one hundred
balls  some powder and a knife  another was changed for a musket  and in
this way we obtained twenty nine  the horses themselves are young and
vigorous  but they are very poor  and most of them have sore backs in
consequence of the roughness of the shoshonee saddle  we are therefore
afraid of loading them too heavily and are anxious to obtain one at
least for each man to carry the baggage  or the man himself  or in the
last resource to serve as food  but with all our exertions we could not
provide all our men with horses  we have  however  been fortunate in
obtaining for the last three days a sufficient supply of flesh  our
hunters having killed two or three deer every day 

friday 30  the weather was fine  and having now made all our purchases 
we loaded our horses  and prepared to start  the greater part of the
band who had delayed their journey on our account  were also ready to
depart  we then took our leave of the shoshonees  who set out on their
visit to the missouri at the same time that we accompanied by the old
guide  his four sons  and another indian  began the descent of the
river  along the same road which captain clarke had previously pursued 
after riding twelve miles we encamped on the south bank of the river 
and as the hunters had brought in three deer early in the morning we did
not feel the want of provisions 

saturday 31  at sunrise we resumed our journey  and halted for three
hours on salmon creek to let the horses graze  we then proceeded to the
stream called berry creek eighteen miles from the camp of last night  as
we passed along  the vallies and prairies were on fire in several
places  in order to collect the bands of the shoshonees and the
flatheads  for their journey to the missouri  the weather was warm and
sultry  but the only inconvenience which we apprehend is a dearth of
food  of which we had to day an abundance  having procured a deer  a
goose  one duck and a prairie fowl  on reaching tower creek we left the
former track of captain clarke  and began to explore the new route 
which is our last hope of getting out of the mountains  for four miles
the road  which is tolerably plain  led us along berry creek to some old
indian lodges where we encamped for the night  the next day 

sunday  september 1  1805  we followed the same road which here left the
creek and turned to the northwest across the hills  during all day we
were riding over these hills  from which are many drains and small
streams running into the river to the left  and at the distance of
eighteen miles  came to a large creek called fish creek emptying into
the columbia which is about six miles from us  it had rained in the
course of the day  and commenced raining again towards evening  we
therefore determined not to leave the low grounds to night  and after
going up fish creek four miles formed our encampment  the country over
which we passed is well watered  but poor and rugged or stony  except
the bottoms of fish creek  and even these are narrow  two men were sent
to purchase fish of the indians at the mouth of the creek  and with the
dried fish which they obtained  and a deer and a few salmon killed by
the party  we were still well supplied  two bear also were wounded but
we could procure neither of them 

monday 2  this morning all the indians left us  except the old guide 
who now conducted us up fish creek  at one mile and a half we passed a
branch of the river coming in through a low ground covered with pine on
the left  and two and a half miles further is a second branch from the
right  after continuing our route along the hills covered with pine  and
a low ground of the same growth  we arrived at the distance of three and
a half miles at the forks of the creek  the road which we were following
now turned up the east side of these forks  and as our guide informed us
led to the missouri  we were therefore left without any track  but as no
time was to be lost we began to cut our road up the west branch of the
creek  this we effected with much difficulty  the thickets of trees and
brush through which we were obliged to cut our way required great
labour  the road itself was over the steep and rocky sides of the hills
where the horses could not move without danger of slipping down  while
their feet were bruised by the rocks and stumps of trees  accustomed as
these animals were to this kind of life they suffered severely  several
of them fell to some distance down the sides of the hills  some turned
over with the baggage  one was crippled  and two gave out exhausted with
fatigue  after crossing the creek several times we at last made five
miles  with great fatigue and labour  and encamped on the left side of
the creek in a small stony low ground  it was not  however  till after
dark that the whole party was collected  and then  as it rained  and we
killed nothing  we passed an uncomfortable night  the party had been too
busily occupied with the horses to make any hunting excursion  and
though as we came along fish creek we saw many beaver dams we saw none
of the animals themselves  in the morning 

tuesday 3  the horses were very stiff and weary  we sent back two men
for the load of the horse which had been crippled yesterday  and which
we had been forced to leave two miles behind  on their return  we set
out at eight o clock  and proceeded up the creek  making a passage
through the brush and timber along its borders  the country is generally
supplied with pine  and in the low grounds is a great abundance of fir
trees  and under bushes  the mountains are high and rugged  and those to
the east of us  covered with snow  with all our precautions the horses
were very much injured in passing over the ridges and steep points of
the hills  and to add to the difficulty  at the distance of eleven
miles  the high mountains closed the creek  so that we were obliged to
leave the creek to the right  and cross the mountain abruptly  the
ascent was here so steep that several of the horses slipped and hurt
themselves  but at last we succeeded in crossing the mountain  and
encamped on a small branch of fish creek  we had now made fourteen miles
in a direction nearly north from the river  but this distance  though
short  was very fatiguing  and rendered still more disagreeable by the
rain which began at three o clock  at dusk it commenced snowing  and
continued till the ground was covered to the depth of two inches  when
it changed into a sleet  we here met with a serious misfortune the last
of our thermometers being broken by accident  after making a scanty
supper on a little corn and a few pheasants killed in the course of the
day  we laid down to sleep  and next morning 

wednesday 4  found every thing frozen  and the ground covered with snow 
we were obliged to wait some time in order to thaw the covers of the
baggage  after which we began our journey at eight o clock  we crossed a
high mountain which joins the dividing ridge between the waters of the
creek we had been ascending  and those running to the north and west  we
had not gone more than six miles over the snow  when we reached the head
of a stream from the right  which directed its course more to the
westward  we descended the steep sides of the hills along its border 
and at the distance of three miles found a small branch coming in from
the eastward  we saw several of the argalia  but they were too shy to be
killed  and we therefore made a dinner from a deer shot by one of the
hunters  then we pursued the course of the stream for three miles  till
it emptied itself into a river from the east  in the wide valley at
their junction  we discovered a large encampment of indians  when we had
reached them and alighted from our horses  we were received with great
cordiality  a council was immediately assembled  white robes were thrown
over our soldiers  and the pipe of peace introduced  after this
ceremony  as it was too late to go any further  we encamped  and
continued smoking and conversing with the chiefs till a late hour  the
next morning 

thursday 5  we assembled the chiefs and warriors  and informed them who
we were  and the purpose for which we visited their country  all this
was however conveyed to them through so many different languages  that
it was not comprehended without difficulty  we therefore proceeded to
the more intelligible language of presents  and made four chiefs by
giving a medal and a small quantity of tobacco to each  we received in
turn from the principal chief  a present consisting of the skins of a
braro  an otter  and two antelopes  and were treated by the women to
some dried roots and berries  we then began to traffic for horses  and
succeeded in exchanging seven  purchasing eleven  for which we gave a
few articles of merchandise 

this encampment consists of thirty three tents  in which were about four
hundred souls  among whom eighty were men  they are called ootlashoots 
and represent themselves as one band of a nation called tushepaws  a
numerous people of four hundred and fifty tents  residing on the heads
of the missouri and columbia rivers  and some of them lower down the
latter river  in person these indians are stout  and their complexion
lighter than that common among indians  the hair of the men is worn in
queues of otter skin  falling in front over the shoulders  a shirt of
dressed skin covers the body to the knee  and on this is worn
occasionally a robe  to these were added leggings and moccasins  the
women suffer their hair to fall in disorder over the face and shoulders 
and their chief article of covering is a long shirt of skin  reaching
down to the ancles  and tied round the waist  in other respects  as also
in the few ornaments which they possess  their appearance is similar to
that of the shoshonees  there is however a difference between the
language of these people which is still farther increased by the very
extraordinary pronunciation of the ootlashoots  their words have all a
remarkably guttural sound  and there is nothing which seems to represent
the tone of their speaking more exactly than the clucking of a fowl  or
the noise of a parrot  this peculiarity renders their voices scarcely
audible  except at a short distance  and when many of them are talking 
forms a strange confusion of sounds  the common conversation we
overheard  consisted of low guttural sounds occasionally broken by a
loud word or two  after which it would relapse and scarcely be
distinguished  they seem kind and friendly and willingly shared with us
berries and roots  which formed their only stock of provisions  their
only wealth is their horses  which are very fine  and so numerous that
this party had with them at least five hundred 

friday 6  we continued this morning with the ootlashoots  from whom we
purchased two more horses  and procured a vocabulary of their language 
the ootlashoots set off about two o clock to join the different bands
who were collecting at the three forks of the missouri  we ourselves
proceeded at the same time  and taking a direction n  30 w  crossed
within the distance of one mile and a half  a small river from the
right  and a creek coming in from the north  this river is the main
stream  and when it reaches the end of the valley  where the mountains
close in upon it  is joined by the river on which we encamped last
evening  as well as by the creek just mentioned  to the river thus
formed we gave the name of captain clarke  he being the first white man
who had ever visited its waters  at the end of five miles on this course
we had crossed the valley  and reached the top of a mountain covered
with pine  this we descended along the steep sides and ravines for a
mile and a half  when we came to a spot on the river  where the
ootlashoots had encamped a few days before  we then followed the course
of the river  which is from twenty five to thirty yards wide  shallow 
stony  and the low grounds on its borders narrow  within the distance of
three and a half miles  we crossed it several times  and after passing a
run on each side  encamped on its right bank  after making ten miles
during the afternoon  the horses were turned out to graze  but those we
had lately bought were secured and watched  lest they should escape  or
be stolen by their former owners  our stock of flour was now exhausted 
and we had but little corn  and as our hunters had killed nothing except
two pheasants  our supper consisted chiefly of berries 

saturday  7  the greater part of the day the weather was dark and rainy 
we continued through the narrow low grounds along the river  till at the
distance of six miles we came to a large creek from the left  after
which the bottoms widen  four miles lower is another creek on the same
side  and the valley now extends from one to three miles  the mountains
on the left being high and bald  with snow on the summits  while the
country to the right is open and hilly  four miles beyond this is a
creek running from the snow top d mountains  and several runs on both
sides of the river  two miles from this last is another creek on the
left  the afternoon was now far advanced  but not being able to find a
fit place to encamp we continued six miles further till after dark  when
we halted for the night  the river here is still shallow and stony  but
is increased to the width of fifty yards  the valley through which we
passed is of a poor soil  and its fertility injured by the quantity of
stone scattered over it  we met two horses which had strayed from the
indians and were now quite wild  no fish was to be seen in the river 
but we obtained a very agreeable supply of two deer  two cranes  and two
pheasants 

sunday  8  we set out early  the snow top d hills on the left approach
the river near our camp  but we soon reached a valley four or five miles
wide  through which we followed the course of the river in a direction
due north  we passed three creeks on the right  and several runs
emptying themselves into the opposite side of the river  at the distance
of eleven miles the river turned more towards the west  we pursued it
for twelve miles  and encamped near a large creek coming in from the
right  which  from its being divided into four different channels  we
called scattering creek  the valley continues to be a poor stony land 
with scarcely any timber  except some pine trees along the waters and
partially scattered on the hills to the right  which  as well as those
on the left  have snow on them  the plant which forces itself most on
our attention is a species of prickly pear very common on this part of
the river  it grows in clusters  in an oval form about the size of a
pigeon s egg  and its thorns are so strong and bearded  that when it
penetrates our feet it brings away the pear itself  we saw two mares and
a colt  which  like the horses seen yesterday  seemed to have lost
themselves and become wild  our game to day consisted of two deer  an
elk  and a prairie fowl 

monday  9  we resumed our journey through the valley  and leaving the
road on our right crossed the scattering creek  and halted at the
distance of twelve miles on a small run from the east  where we
breakfasted on the remains of yesterday s hunt  we here took a meridian
altitude  which gave the latitude of 46 degrees 41  38  9    we then
continued  and at the distance of four miles passed over to the left
bank of the river  where we found a large road through the valley  at
this place is a handsome stream of very clear water  a hundred yards
wide with low banks  and a bed formed entirely of gravel  it has every
appearance of being navigable  but as it contains no salmon  we presume
there must be some fall below which obstructs their passage  our guide
could not inform us where this river discharged its waters  he said that
as far as he knew its course it ran along the mountains to the north 
and that not far from our present position it was joined by another
stream nearly as large as itself  which rises in the mountains to the
east near the missouri  and flows through an extensive valley or open
prairie  through this prairie is the great indian road to the waters of
the missouri  and so direct is the route  that in four days  journey
from this place we might reach the missouri about thirty miles above
what we called the gates of the rocky mountains  or the spot where the
valley of that river widens into an extensive plain on entering the
chain of mountains  at ten miles from our camp is a small creek falling
in from the eastward  five miles below which we halted at a large stream
which empties itself on the west side of the river  it is a fine bold
creek of clear water about twenty yards wide  and we called it
 traveller s rest  creek  for as our guide told us that we should here
leave the river  we determined to remain for the purpose of making
celestial observations and collecting some food  as the country through
which we are to pass has no game for a great distance 

the valley of the river through which we have been passing is generally
a prairie from five to six miles in width  and with a cold gravelly
white soil  the timber which it possesses is almost exclusively pine 
chiefly of the long leafed kind  with some spruce  and a species of fir
resembling the scotch fir  near the water courses are also seen a few
narrow leafed cottonwood trees  and the only underbrush is the redwood 
honeysuckle  and rosebushes  our game was four deer  three geese  four
ducks  and three prairie fowls  one of the hunters brought in a
red headed woodpecker of the large kind common in the united states 
but the first of the kind we have seen since leaving the illinois 

tuesday  10  the morning being fair all the hunters were sent out  and
the rest of the party employed in repairing their clothes  two of them
were sent to the junction of the river from the east  along which the
indians go to the missouri  it is about seven miles below
traveller s rest creek  the country at the forks is seven or eight miles
wide  level and open  but with little timber  its course is to the
north  and we incline to believe that this is the river which the
minnetarees had described to us as running from south to north along the
west side of the rocky mountains  not far from the sources of medicine
river  there is moreover reason to suppose  that after going as far
northward as the head waters of that river it turns to the westward and
joins the tacootchetessee  towards evening one of the hunters returned
with three indians  whom he had met in his excursion up traveller s rest
creek  as soon as they saw him they prepared to attack him with arrows 
but he quieted them by laying down his gun and advancing towards them 
and soon persuaded them to come to the camp  our shoshonee guide could
not speak the language of these people  but by the universal language of
signs and gesticulations  which is perfectly intelligible among the
indians  he found that these were three tushepaw flatheads in pursuit of
two men  supposed to be shoshonees  who had stolen twenty three of their
horses  we gave them some boiled venison and a few presents  such as a
fishhook  a steel to strike fire  and a little powder  but they seemed
better pleased with a piece of riband which we tied in the hair of each
of them  they were however in such haste  lest their horses should be
carried off  that two of them set off after sunset in quest of the
robbers  the third however was persuaded to remain with us and conduct
us to his relations  these he said were numerous  and resided on the
columbia in the plain below the mountains  from that place he added 
the river was navigable to the ocean  that some of his relations had
been there last fall and seen an old white man who resided there by
himself  and who gave them some handkerchiefs like those we have  the
distance from this place is five sleeps or days  journey  when our
hunters had all joined us we found our provisions consisted of four
deer  a beaver  and three grouse 

the observation of to day gave 46 degrees 48  28  as the latitude of
travellers rest creek 

wednesday 11  two of our horses having strayed away we were detained all
the morning before they were caught  in the meantime our tushepaw indian
became impatient of the delay  and set out to return home alone  as
usual we had dispatched four of our best hunters ahead  and as we hoped
with their aid and our present stock of provisions to subsist on the
route  we proceeded at three o clock up the right side of the creek  and
encamped under some old indian huts at the distance of seven miles  the
road was plain and good  the valley is however narrower than that which
we left and bordered by high and rugged hills to the right  while the
mountains on the left were covered with snow  the day was fair and warm 
the wind from the northwest 

thursday 12  there was a white frost this morning  we proceeded at seven
o clock and soon passed a stream falling in on the right  near which was
an old indian camp with a bath or sweating house covered with earth  at
two miles distance we ascended a high  and thence continued through a
hilly and thickly timbered country for nine miles  when we came to the
forks of the creek  where the road branches up each fork  we followed
the western route  and finding that the creek made a considerable bend
at the distance of four miles  crossed a high mountain in order to avoid
the circuit  the road had been very bad during the first part of the
day  but the passage of the mountain  which was eight miles across  was
very painful to the horses  as we were obliged to go over steep stony
sides of hills and along the hollows and ravines  rendered more
disagreeable  by the fallen timber  chiefly pine  spruce pine and fir 
we at length reached the creek  having made twenty three miles of a
route so difficult that some of the party did not join us before ten
o clock  we found the account of the scantiness of game but too true  as
we were not able to procure any thing during the whole of yesterday  and
to day we killed only a single pheasant  along the road we observed many
of the pine trees pealed off  which is done by the indians to procure
the inner bark for food in the spring 

friday 13  two of the horses strayed away during the night  and one of
them being captain lewis s  he remained with four men to search for them
while we proceeded up the creek  at the distance of two miles we came to
several springs issuing from large rocks of a coarse hard grit  and
nearly boiling hot  those seem to be much frequented as there are
several paths made by elk  deer and other animals  and near one of the
springs a hole or indian bath  and roads leading in different
directions  these embarrassed our guide  who mistaking the road took us
three miles out of the proper course over an exceedingly bad route  we
then fell into the right road  and proceeded on very well  when having
made five miles we stopped to refresh the horses  captain lewis here
joined us  but not having been able to find his horse two men were sent
back to continue the search  we then proceeded along the same kind of
country which we passed yesterday  and after crossing a mountain and
leaving the sources of the travellers rest creek on the left  reached
after five miles riding a small creek which also came in from the left
hand  passing through open glades  some of which were half a mile wide 
the road which had been as usual rugged and stony  became firm  plain
and level after quitting the head of travellers rest  we followed the
course of this new creek for two miles and encamped at a spot where the
mountains close on each side  other mountains covered with snow are in
view to the southeast and southwest  we were somewhat more fortunate
to day in killing a deer and several pheasants which were of the common
species  except that the tail was black 

saturday 14  the day was very cloudy with rain and hail in the vallies 
while on the top of the mountains some snow fell  we proceeded early 
and continuing along the right side of glade creek crossed a high
mountain  and at the distance of six miles reached the place where it is
joined by another branch of equal size from the right  near the forks
the tushepaws have had an encampment which is but recently abandoned 
for the grass is entirely destroyed by horses  and two fish weirs across
the creek are still remaining  no fish were however to be seen  we here
passed over to the left side of the creek and began the ascent of a very
high and steep mountain nine miles across  on reaching the other side we
found a large branch from the left  which seems to rise in the snowy
mountains to the south and southeast  we continued along the creek two
miles further  when night coming on we encamped opposite a small island
at the mouth of a branch on the right side of the river  the mountains
which we crossed to day were much more difficult than those of
yesterday  the last was particularly fatiguing  being steep and stony 
broken by fallen timber  and thickly overgrown by pine  spruce  fir 
haematack and tamarac  although we had made only seventeen miles we were
all very weary  the whole stock of animal food was now exhausted  and we
therefore killed a colt  on which we made a hearty supper  from this
incident we called the last creek we had passed from the south
colt killed creek  the river itself is eighty yards wide  with a swift
current  and a stony channel  its indian name is kooskooskee 

sunday 15  at an early hour we proceeded along the right side of the
kooskooskee over steep rocky points of land  till at the distance of
four miles we reached an old indian fishing place  the road here turned
to the right of the water  and began to ascend a mountain  but the fire
and wind had prostrated or dried almost all the timber on the south
side  and the ascents were so steep that we were forced to wind in every
direction round the high knobs which constantly impeded our progress 
several of the horses lost their foot hold and slipped  one of them
which was loaded with a desk and small trunk  rolled over and over for
forty yards  till his fall was stopped by a tree  the desk was broken 
but the poor animal escaped without much injury  after clambering in
this way for four miles  we came to a high snowy part of the mountain
where was a spring of water  at which we halted two hours to refresh our
horses 

on leaving the spring the road continued as bad as it was below  and the
timber more abundant  at four miles we reached the top of the mountain 
and foreseeing no chance of meeting with water  we encamped on the
northern side of the mountain  near an old bank of snow  three feet
deep  some of this we melted  and supped on the remains of the colt
killed yesterday  our only game to day was two pheasants  and the horses
on which we calculated as a last resource begin to fail us  for two of
them were so poor  and worn out with fatigue  that we were obliged to
leave them behind  all around us are high rugged mountains  among which
is a lofty range from southeast to northwest  whose tops are without
timber  and in some places covered with snow  the night was cloudy and
very cold  and three hours before daybreak 

monday 16  it began to snow  and continued all day  so that by evening
it was six or eight inches deep  this covered the track so completely 
that we were obliged constantly to halt and examine  lest we should lose
the route  in many places we had nothing to guide us except the
branches of the trees which  being low  have been rubbed by the burdens
of the indian horses  the road was  like that of yesterday  along steep
hill sides  obstructed with fallen timber  and a growth of eight
different species of pine  so thickly strewed that the snow falls from
them as we pass  and keeps us continually wet to the skin  and so cold 
that we are anxious lest our feet should be frozen  as we have only thin
moccasins to defend them 

at noon we halted to let the horses feed on some long grass on the south
side of the mountains  and endeavoured by making fires to keep ourselves
warm  as soon as the horses were refreshed  captain clarke went ahead
with one man  and at the distance of six miles reached a stream from the
right  and prepared fires by the time of our arrival at dusk  we here
encamped in a piece of low ground  thickly timbered  but scarcely large
enough to permit us to lie level  we had now made thirteen miles  we
were all very wet  cold  and hungry  but although before setting out
this morning  we had seen four deer  yet we could not procure any of
them  and were obliged to kill a second colt for our supper 

tuesday 17  our horses became so much scattered during the night  that
we were detained till one o clock before they were all collected  we
then continued our route over high rough knobs  and several drains and
springs  and along a ridge of country separating the waters of two small
rivers  the road was still difficult  and several of the horses fell and
injured themselves very much  so that we were unable to advance more
than ten miles to a small stream  on which we encamped 

we had killed a few pheasants  but these being insufficient for our
subsistence  we killed another of the colts  this want of provisions 
and the extreme fatigue to which we were subjected  and the dreary
prospects before us  began to dispirit the men  it was therefore agreed
that captain clarke should go on ahead with six hunters  and endeavour
to kill something for the support of the party  he therefore set out 

wednesday 18  early in the morning in hopes of finding a level country
from which he might send back some game  his route lay s  85 degrees w  
along the same high dividing ridge  and the road was still very bad  but
he moved on rapidly  and at the distance of twenty miles was rejoiced on
discovering far off an extensive plain towards the west and southwest 
bounded by a high mountain  he halted an hour to let the horses eat a
little grass on the hill sides  and then went on twelve and a half miles
till he reached a bold creek  running to the left  on which he encamped 
to this stream he gave the very appropriate name of hungry creek  for
having procured no game  they had nothing to eat 

in the meantime we were detained till after eight o clock by the loss of
one of our horses which had strayed away and could not be found  we then
proceeded  but having soon finished the remainder of the colt killed
yesterday  felt the want of provisions  which was more sensible from our
meeting with no water  till towards nightfall we found some in a ravine
among the hills  by pushing on our horses almost to their utmost
strength  we made eighteen miles 

we then melted some snow  and supped on a little portable soup  a few
canisters of which  with about twenty weight of bears oil  are our only
remaining means of subsistence  our guns are scarcely of any service 
for there is no living creature in these mountains  except a few small
pheasants  a small species of gray squirrel  and a blue bird of the
vulture kind about the size of a turtle dove or jay  and even these are
difficult to shoot 

thursday 19  captain clarke proceeded up the creek  along which the road
was more steep and stony than any he had yet passed  at six miles
distance he reached a small plain  in which he fortunately found a
horse  on which he breakfasted  and hung the rest on a tree for the
party in the rear  two miles beyond this he left the creek  and crossed
three high mountains  rendered almost impassable from the steepness of
the ascent and the quantity of fallen timber  after clambering over
these ridges and mountains  and passing the heads of some branches of
hungry creek  he came to a large creek running westward  this he
followed for four miles  then turned to the right down the mountain 
till he came to a small creek to the left  here he halted  having made
twenty two miles on his course  south eighty degrees west  though the
winding route over the mountains almost doubled the distance  on
descending the last mountain  the heat became much more sensible after
the extreme cold he had experienced for several days past  besides the
breakfast in the morning  two pheasants were their only food during the
day  and the only kinds of birds they saw were the blue jay  a small
white headed hawk  a larger hawk  crows  and ravens 

we followed soon after sunrise  at six miles the ridge terminated and we
had before us the cheering prospect of the large plain to the southwest 
on leaving the ridge we again ascended and went down several mountains 
and six miles further came to hungry creek where it was fifteen yards
wide  and received the waters of a branch from the north  we went up it
on a course nearly due west  and at three miles crossed a second branch
flowing from the same quarter  the country is thickly covered with pine
timber  of which we have enumerated eight distinct species  three miles
beyond this last branch of hungry creek we encamped  after a fatiguing
route of eighteen miles  the road along the creek is a narrow rocky path
near the borders of very high precipices  from which a fall seems almost
inevitable destruction  one of our horses slipped and rolling over with
his load down the hill side  which was nearly perpendicular and strewed
with large irregular rocks  nearly a hundred yards  and did not stop
till he fell into the creek  we all expected he was killed  but to our
astonishment  on taking off his load  he rose  and seemed but little
injured  and in twenty minutes proceeded with his load  having no other
provision we took some portable soup  our only refreshment during the
day  this abstinence  joined with fatigue  has a visible effect on our
health  the men are growing weak and losing their flesh very fast 
several are afflicted with the dysentery  and eruptions of the skin are
very common 

friday 20  captain clarke went on through a country as rugged as usual 
till on passing a low mountain he came at the distance of four miles to
the forks of a large creek  down this he kept on a course south 60
degrees west for two miles  then turning to the right  continued over a
dividing ridge where were the heads of several little streams  and at
twelve miles distance descended the last of the rocky mountains and
reached the level country  a beautiful open plain partially supplied
with pine now presented itself  he continued for five miles when he
discovered three indian boys  who  on observing the party  ran off and
hid themselves in the grass  captain clarke immediately alighted  and
giving his horse and gun to one of the men went after the boys  he soon
relieved their apprehensions and sent them forward to the village about
a mile off with presents of small pieces of riband  soon after the boys
had reached home  a man came out to meet the party  with great caution 
but he conducted them to a large tent in the village  and all the
inhabitants gathered round to view with a mixture of fear and pleasure
these wonderful strangers  the conductor now informed captain clarke by
signs  that the spacious tent was the residence of the great chief  who
had set out three days ago with all the warriors to attack some of their
enemies towards the southwest  that he would not return before fifteen
or eighteen days  and that in the meantime there were only a few men
left to guard the women and children  they now set before them a small
piece of buffaloe meat  some dried salmon  berries  and several kinds of
roots  among these last is one which is round and much like an onion in
appearance and sweet to the taste  it is called quamash  and is eaten
either in its natural state  or boiled into a kind of soup or made into
a cake  which is then called pasheco  after the long abstinence this was
a sumptuous treat  we returned the kindness of the people by a few small
presents  and then went on in company with one of the chiefs to a second
village in the same plain  at the distance of two miles  here the party
was treated with great kindness and passed the night  the hunters were
sent out  but though they saw some tracks of deer were not able to
procure any thing 

we were detained till ten o clock before we could collect our scattered
horses  we then proceeded for two miles  when to our great joy we found
the horse which captain clarke had killed  and a note apprising us of
his intention of going to the plains towards the southwest  and collect
provisions by the time we reached him  at one o clock we halted on a
small stream  and made a hearty meal of horse flesh  on examination it
now appeared that one of the horses was missing  and the man in whose
charge he had been  was directed to return and search for him  he came
back in about two hours without having been able to find the horse  but
as the load was too valuable to be lost  two of the best woodsmen were
directed to continue the search while we proceeded  our general course
was south 25 degrees west through a thick forest of large pine  which
has fallen in many places  and very much obstructs the road  after
making about fifteen miles we encamped on a ridge where we could find
but little grass and no water  we succeeded  however  in procuring a
little from a distance  and supped on the remainder of the horse 

on descending the heights of the mountains the soil becomes gradually
more fertile  and the land through which we passed this evening  is of
an excellent quality  it has a dark gray soil  though very broken  and
with large masses of gray free stone above the ground in many places 
among the vegetable productions we distinguished the alder  honeysuckle 
and huckleberry  common in the united states  and a species of
honeysuckle  known only westward of the rocky mountains  which rises to
the height of about four feet  and bears a white berry  there is also a
plant resembling the chokecherry  which grows in thick clumps eight or
ten feet high  and bears a black berry with a single stone of a sweetish
taste  the arbor vitae too  is very common  and grows to a great size 
being from two to six feet in diameter 

saturday 21  the free use of food  to which he had not been accustomed 
made captain clarke very sick both yesterday evening and during the
whole of to day  he therefore sent out all the hunters and remained
himself at the village  as well on account of his sickness as for the
purpose of avoiding suspicion and collecting information from the
indians as to the route 

the two villages consist of about thirty double tents  and the
inhabitants call themselves chopunnish or pierced nose  the chief drew a
chart of the river  and explained  that a greater chief than himself 
who governed this village and was called the twisted hair  was now
fishing at the distance of half a day s ride down the river  his chart
made the kooskooskee fork a little below his camp  a second fork below 
still further on a large branch flowed in on each side  below which the
river passed the mountains  here was a great fall of water  near which
lived white people  from whom were procured the white beads and brass
ornaments worn by the women 

a chief of another band made a visit this morning  and smoked with
captain clarke  the hunters returned without having been able to kill
any thing  captain clarke purchased as much dried salmon  roots  and
berries as he could  with the few articles he chanced to have in his
pockets  and having sent them by one of the men and a hired indian back
to captain lewis  he went on towards the camp of the twisted hair  it
was four o clock before he set out  and the night soon came on  but
having met an indian coming from the river  they engaged him by a
present of a neckcloth  to guide them to the twisted hair s camp  for
twelve miles they proceeded through the plain before they reached the
river hills  which are very high and steep  the whole valley from these
hills to the rocky mountain is a beautiful level country  with a rich
soil covered with grass  there is  however  but little timber  and the
ground is badly watered  the plain is so much lower than the surrounding
hills  or so much sheltered by them  that the weather is quite warm 
while the cold of the mountains was extreme  from the top of the river
hills they proceeded down for three miles till they reached the water
side  between eleven and twelve o clock at night  here we found a small
camp of five squaws and three children  the chief himself being
encamped  with two others  on a small island in the river  the guide
called to him and he soon came over  captain clarke gave him a medal 
and they smoked together till one o clock 

we could not set out till eleven o clock  because being obliged in the
evening to loosen our horses to enable them to find subsistence  it is
always difficult to collect them in the morning  at that hour we
continued along the ridge on which we had slept  and at a mile and a
half reached a large creek running to our left  just above its junction
with one of its branches  we proceeded down the low grounds of this
creek  which are level  wide  and heavily timbered  but turned to the
right at the distance of two and a half miles  and began to pass the
broken and hilly country  but the thick timber had fallen in so many
places that we could scarcely make our way  after going five miles we
passed the creek on which captain clarke had encamped during the night
of the 19th  and continued five miles further over the same kind of
road  till we came to the forks of a large creek  we crossed the
northern branch of this stream  and proceeded down it on the west side
for a mile  here we found a small plain where there was tolerable grass
for the horses  and therefore remained during the night  having made
fifteen miles on a course s  30 degrees w 

the arbor vitae increases in size and quantity as we advance  some of
the trees we passed to day being capable of forming periogues at least
forty five feet in length  we were so fortunate also as to kill a few
pheasants and a prairie wolf  which  with the remainder of the horse 
supplied us with one meal  the last of our provisions  our food for the
morrow being wholly dependent on the chance of our guns 

sunday  22  captain clarke passed over to the island with the
twisted hair  who seemed to be cheerful and sincere in his conduct  the
river at this place is about one hundred and sixty yards wide  but
interrupted by shoals  and the low grounds on its borders are narrow 
the hunters brought in three deer  after which captain clarke left his
party  and accompanied by the twisted hair and his son  rode back to the
village  where he arrived about sunset  they then walked up together to
the second village  where we had just arrived  we had intended to set
out early  but one of the men having neglected to hobble his horse he
strayed away  and we were obliged to wait till nearly twelve o clock  we
then proceeded on a western course for two and a half miles  when we met
the hunters sent by captain clarke from the village  seven and a half
miles distant  with provisions  this supply was most seasonable  as we
had tasted nothing since last night  and the fish  and roots  and
berries  in addition to a crow which we killed on the route  completely
satisfied our hunger  after this refreshment we proceeded in much better
spirits  and at a few miles were overtaken by the two men who had been
sent back after a horse on the 20th  they were perfectly exhausted with
the fatigue of walking and the want of food  but as we had two spare
horses they were mounted and brought on to the village 

they had set out about three o clock in the afternoon of the 20th with
one horse between them  after crossing the mountain they came to the
place where we had eaten the horse  here they encamped  and having no
food made a fire and roasted the head of the horse  which even our
appetites had spared  and supped on the ears  skin  lips   c  of the
animal  the next morning  21st  they found the track of the horse  and
pursuing it recovered the saddle bags  and at length about eleven
o clock  the horse himself  being now both mounted  they set out to
return and slept at a small stream  during the day they had nothing at
all except two pheasants  which were so torn to pieces by the shot  that
the head and legs were the only parts fit for food  in this situation
they found the next morning  22d  that during the night their horses had
run away from them or been stolen by the indians  they searched for them
until nine o clock  when seeing that they could not recover them and
fearful of starving if they remained where they were  they set out on
foot to join us  carrying the saddle bags alternately  they walked as
fast as they could during the day  till they reached us in a deplorable
state of weakness and inanition 

as we approached the village  most of the women  though apprised of our
being expected  fled with their children into the neighbouring woods 
the men  however  received us without any apprehension  and gave us a
plentiful supply of provisions  the plains were now crowded with
indians  who came to see the persons of the whites and the strange
things they brought with them  but as our guide was perfectly a stranger
to their language we could converse by signs only  our inquiries were
chiefly directed to the situation of the country  the courses of the
rivers  and the indian villages  of all which we received information
from several of the indians  and as their accounts varied but little
from each other  we were induced to place confidence in them  among
others  the twisted hair drew a chart of the river on a white elk skin 
according to this  the kooskooskee forks a few miles from this place 
two days towards the south is another and larger fork on which the
shoshonee or snake indians fish  five days  journey further is a large
river from the northwest into which clarke s river empties itself  from
the mouth of that river to the falls is five days  journey further  on
all the forks as well as on the main river great numbers of indians
reside  and at the falls are establishments of whites  this was the
story of the twisted hair 

monday 23  the chiefs and warriors were all assembled this morning  and
we explained to them where we came from  the objects of our visiting
them  and our pacific intentions towards all the indians  this being
conveyed by signs  might not have been perfectly comprehended  but
appeared to give perfect satisfaction  we now gave a medal to two of the
chiefs  a shirt in addition to the medal already received by the
twisted hair  and delivered a flag and a handkerchief for the grand
chief on his return  to these were added a knife  a handkerchief and a
small piece of tobacco for each chief  the inhabitants did not give us
any provisions gratuitously  we therefore purchased a quantity of fish 
berries  chiefly red haws  and roots  and in the afternoon went on to
the second village  the twisted hair introduced us into his own tent 
which consisted however of nothing more than pine bushes and bark  and
gave us some dried salmon boiled  we continued our purchases  and
obtained as much provision as our horses could carry in their present
weak condition as far as the river  the men exchanged a few old
canisters for dressed elk skins  of which they made shirts  great crowds
of the natives are round us all night  but we have not yet missed any
thing except a knife and a few other articles stolen yesterday from a
shot pouch  at dark we had a hard wind from the southwest accompanied
with rain which lasted half an hour  but in the morning 

tuesday 24  the weather was fair  we sent back colter in search of the
horses lost in the mountains  and having collected the rest set out at
ten o clock along the same route already passed by captain clarke
towards the river  all round the village the women are busily employed
in gathering and dressing the pasheco root  of which large quantities
are heaped up in piles over the plain  we now felt severely the
consequence of eating heartily after our late privations  captain lewis
and two of the men were taken very ill last evening  and to day he could
scarcely sit on his horse  while others were obliged to be put on
horseback  and some from extreme weakness and pain  were forced to lie
down along side of the road for some time  at sunset we reached the
island where the hunters had been left on the 22d  they had been
unsuccessful  having killed only two deer since that time  and two of
them are very sick  a little below this island is a larger one on which
we encamped  and administered rush s pills to the sick 

wednesday 25  the weather was very hot  and oppressive to the party 
most of whom are now complaining of sickness  our situation indeed 
rendered it necessary to husband our remaining strength  and it was
determined to proceed down the river in canoes  captain clarke therefore
set out with the twisted hair and two young men  in quest of timber for
canoes  as he went down the river he crossed at the distance of a mile a
creek from the right  which from the rocks that obstructed its passage 
he called rockdam river  the hills along the river are high and steep 
the low grounds are narrow  and the navigation of the river embarrassed
by two rapids  at the distance of three miles further he reached two
nearly equal forks of the river  one of which flowed in from the north 
here he rested for an hour  and cooked a few salmon which one of the
indians caught with a gig  here too  he was joined by two canoes of
indians from below  they were long  steady  and loaded with the
furniture and provisions of two families  he now crossed the south fork 
and returned to the camp on the south side  through a narrow pine bottom
the greater part of the way  in which was found much fine timber for
canoes  one of the indian boats with two men  set out at the same time 
and such was their dexterity in managing the pole  that they reached
camp within fifteen minutes after him  although they had to drag the
canoe over three rapids  he found captain lewis  and several of the men
still very sick  and distributed to such as were in need of it  salts
and tartar emetic 

thursday 26  having resolved to go down to some spot calculated for
building canoes  we set out early this morning and proceeded five miles 
and encamped on low ground on the south  opposite the forks of the
river  but so weak were the men that several were taken sick in coming
down  the weather being oppressively hot  two chiefs and their families
followed us  and encamped with a great number of horses near us  and
soon after our arrival we were joined by two indians  who came down the
north fork on a raft  we purchased some fresh salmon  and having
distributed axes  and portioned off the labour of the party  began 

friday 27  at an early hour  the preparations for making five canoes 
but few of the men  however  were able to work  and of these several
were soon taken ill  as the day proved very hot  the hunters too 
returned without any game  and seriously indisposed  so that nearly the
whole party was now ill  we procured some fresh salmon  and colter  who
now returned with one of the horses  brought half a deer  which was very
nourishing to the invalids  several indians from a camp below  came up
to see us 

saturday 28  the men continue ill  though some of those first attacked
are recovering  their general complaint is a heaviness at the stomach 
and a lax  which is rendered more painful by the heat of the weather 
and the diet of fish and roots  to which they are confined  as no game
is to be procured  a number of indians collect about us in the course of
the day to gaze at the strange appearance of every thing belonging to
us 

sunday 29  the morning was cool  the wind from the southwest  but in the
afternoon the heat returned  the men continue ill  but all those who are
able to work are occupied at the canoes  the spirits of the party were
much recruited by three deer brought in by the hunters  and the next
day 

monday 30th  the sick began to recruit their strength  the morning being
fair and pleasant  the indians pass in great numbers up and down the
river  and we observe large quantities of small duck going down this
morning 

tuesday  october 1  1805  the morning was cool  the wind easterly  but
the latter part of the day was warm  we were visited by several indians
from the tribes below  and others from the main south fork  to two of
the most distinguished men  we made presents of a ring and broach  and
to five others a piece of riband  a little tobacco  and the fifth part
of a neckcloth  we now dried our clothes and other articles  and
selected some articles such as the indians admire  in order to purchase
some provisions  as we have nothing left except a little dried fish 
which operates as a complete purgative 

wednesday 2  the day is very warm  two men were sent to the village with
a quantity of these articles to purchase food  we are now reduced to
roots  which produce violent pains in the stomach  our work continued as
usual  and many of the party are convalescent  the hunters returned in
the afternoon with nothing but a small prairie wolf  so that our
provisions being exhausted  we killed one of the horses to eat  and
provide soup for the sick 

thursday 3  the fine cool morning and easterly wind had an agreeable
effect upon the party  most of whom are now able to work  the indians
from below left us  and we were visited by others from different
quarters 

friday 4  again we had a cool east wind from the mountains  the men were
now much better  and captain lewis himself so far recovered as to walk
about a little  three indians arrived to day from the great river to the
south  the two men also returned from the village with roots and fish 
and as the flesh of the horse killed yesterday was exhausted  we were
confined to that diet  although unwholesome as well as unpleasant  the
afternoon was warm 

saturday 5  the wind easterly  and the weather cool  the canoes being
nearly finished it became necessary to dispose of our horses  they were
therefore collected to the number of thirty eight  and being branded and
marked were delivered to three indians  the two brothers and the son of
a chief  who promises to accompany us down the river  to each of those
men we gave a knife and some small articles  and they agreed to take
good care of the horses till our return  the hunters with all their
diligence are unable to kill any thing  the hills being high and rugged 
and the woods too dry to hunt deer  which is the only game in the
country  we therefore continue to eat dried fish and roots  which are
purchased from the squaws  by means of small presents  but chiefly white
beads  of which they are extravagantly fond  some of these roots seem to
possess very active properties  for after supping on them this evening 
we were swelled to such a degree as to be scarcely able to breathe for
several hours  towards night we lanched two canoes which proved to be
very good 

sunday 6  this morning is again cool  and the wind easterly  the general
course of the winds seems to resemble that which we observed on the east
side of the mountain  while on the head waters of the missouri  we had
every morning a cool wind from the west  at this place a cool breeze
springs up during the latter part of the night  or near daybreak  and
continues till seven or eight o clock  when it subsides  and the latter
part of the day is warm  captain lewis is not so well as he was  and
captain clarke was also taken ill  we had all our saddles buried in a
cache near the river  about half a mile below  and deposited at the same
time a canister of powder  and a bag of balls  the time which could be
spared from our labours on the canoes  was devoted to some astronomical
observations  the latitude of our camp as deduced from the mean of two
observations is 46 degrees 34  56  3   north 

monday 7  this morning all the canoes were put in the water and loaded 
the oars fixed  and every preparation made for setting out but when we
were all ready  the two chiefs who had promised to accompany us  were
not to be found  and at the same time we missed a pipe tomahawk  we
therefore proceeded without them  below the forks this river is called
the kooskooskee  and is a clear rapid stream  with a number of shoals
and difficult places  for some miles the hills are steep  the low
grounds narrow  but then succeeds an open country with a few trees
scattered along the river  at the distance of nine miles is a small
creek on the left  we passed in the course of the day ten rapids  in
descending which  one of the canoes struck a rock  and sprung a leak  we
however continued for nineteen miles  and encamped on the left side of
the river  opposite to the mouth of a small run  here the canoe was
unloaded and repaired  and two lead canisters of powder deposited 
several camps of indians were on the sides of the river  but we had
little intercourse with any of them 

tuesday 8  we set out at nine o clock  at eight and a half miles we
passed an island  four and a half miles lower a second island  opposite
a small creek on the left side of the river  five miles lower is another
island on the left  a mile and a half below which is a fourth  at a
short distance from this is a large creek from the right  to which we
gave the name of colter s creek  from colter one of the men  we had
left this creek about a mile and a half  and were passing the last of
fifteen rapids which we had been fortunate enough to escape  when one of
the canoes struck  and a hole being made in her side  she immediately
filled and sunk  the men  several of whom could not swim  clung to the
boat till one of our canoes could be unloaded  and with the assistance
of an indian boat  they were all brought to shore  all the goods were so
much wet  that we were obliged to halt for the night  and spread them
out to dry  while all this was exhibited  it was necessary to place two
sentinels over the merchandise  for we found that the indians  though
kind and disposed to give us every aid during our distress  could not
resist the temptation of pilfering some of the small articles  we passed
during our route of twenty miles to day  several encampments of indians
on the islands  and near the rapids  which places are chosen as most
convenient for taking salmon  at one of these camps we found our two
chiefs  who after promising to descend the river with us  had left us 
they however willingly came on board after we had gone through the
ceremony of smoking 

wednesday  9  the morning was as usual  cool  but as the weather both
yesterday and to day was cloudy  our merchandise dried but slowly  the
boat  though much injured  was repaired by ten o clock so as to be
perfectly fit for service  but we were obliged to remain during the day
till the articles were sufficiently dry to be reloaded  the interval we
employed in purchasing fish for the voyage and conversing with the
indians  in the afternoon we were surprised at hearing that our old
shoshonee guide and his son had left us  and been seen running up the
river several miles above  as he had never given any notice of his
intention  nor had even received his pay for guiding us  we could not
imagine the cause of his desertion  nor did he ever return to explain
his conduct  we requested the chief to send a horseman after him to
request that he would return and receive what we owed him  from this
however he dissuaded us  and said very frankly  that his nation  the
chopunnish  would take from the old man any presents that he might have
on passing their camp 

the indians came about our camp at night  and were very gay and
good humoured with the men  among other exhibitions was that of a squaw
who appeared to be crazy  she sang in a wild incoherent manner  and
would offer to the spectators all the little articles she possessed 
scarifying herself in a horrid manner if any one refused her present 
she seemed to be an object of pity among the indians  who suffered her
to do as she pleased without interruption 

thursday  10  a fine morning  we loaded the canoes and set off at seven
o clock  at the distance of two and a half miles we had passed three
islands  the last of which is opposite to a small stream on the right 
within the following three and a half miles is another island and a
creek on the left  with wide low grounds  containing willow and
cottonwood trees  on which were three tents of indians  two miles lower
is the head of a large island  and six and a half miles further we
halted at an encampment of eight lodges on the left  in order to view a
rapid before us  we had already passed eight  and some of them
difficult  but this was worse than any of them  being a very hazardous
ripple strewed with rocks  we here purchased roots and dined with the
indians  among them was a man from the falls  who says that he saw white
people at that place and is very desirous of going down with us  an
offer which however we declined  just above this camp we had passed a
tent  near which was an indian bathing himself in a small pond or hole
of water  warmed by throwing in hot stones  after finishing our meal we
descended the rapid with no injury  except to one of our boats which ran
against a rock  but in the course of an hour was brought off with only a
small split in her side  this ripple  from its appearance and
difficulty  we named the rugged rapid  we went on over five other rapids
of a less dangerous kind  and at the distance of five miles reached a
large fork of the river from the south  and after coming twenty miles 
halted below the junction on the right side of the river  our arrival
soon attracted the attention of the indians  who flocked in all
directions to see us  in the evening the indian from the falls  whom we
had seen at the rugged rapid  joined us with his son in a small canoe 
and insisted on accompanying us to the falls  being again reduced to
fish and roots we made an experiment to vary our food by purchasing  a
few dogs  and after having been accustomed to horse flesh  felt no
disrelish to this new dish  the chopunnish have great numbers of dogs
which they employ for domestic purposes  but never eat  and our using
the flesh of that animal soon brought us into ridicule as dog eaters 

the country at the junction of the two rivers is an open plain on all
sides  broken towards the left by a distant ridge of highland  thinly
covered with timber  this is the only body of timber which the country
possesses  for at the forks there is not a tree to be seen  and during
almost the whole descent of sixty miles down the kooskooskee from its
forks there are very few  this southern branch is in fact the main
stream of lewis s river on which we encamped when among the shoshonees 
the indians inform us that it is navigable for sixty miles  that not far
from its mouth it receives a branch from the south  and a second and
larger branch  two days  march up  and nearly parallel to the first
chopunnish villages  we met near the mountains  this branch is called
pawnashte  and is the residence of a chief  who  according to their
expression  has more horses than he can count  the river has many
rapids  near which are situated many fishing camps  there being ten
establishments of this before reaching the first southern branch  one on
that stream  five between that and the pawnashte  one on that river  and
two above it  besides many other indians who reside high up on the more
distant waters of this river  all these indians belong to the
chopunnish nation  and live in tents of an oblong form  covered with
flat roofs 

at its mouth lewis s river is about two hundred and fifty yards wide 
and its water is of a greenish blue colour  the kooskooskee  whose
waters are clear as crystal  one hundred and fifty yards in width  and
after the union the river enlarges to the space of three hundred yards 
at the point of the union is an indian cabin  and in lewis s river a
small island 

the chopunnish or pierced nose nation  who reside on the kooskooskee and
lewis s rivers  are in person stout  portly  well looking men  the women
are small  with good features  and generally handsome  though the
complexion of both sexes is darker than that of the tushepaws  in dress
they resemble that nation  being fond of displaying their ornaments  the
buffaloe or elk skin robe decorated with beads  sea shells  chiefly
mother of pearl  attached to an otter skin collar and hung in the hair 
which falls in front in two queues  feathers  paints of different kinds 
principally white  green  and light blue  all of which they find in
their own country  these are the chief ornaments they use  in the winter
they wear a short shirt of dressed skins  long painted leggings and
moccasins  and a plait of twisted grass round the neck 

the dress of the women is more simple  consisting of a long shirt of
argalia or ibex skin  reaching down to the ankles without a girdle  to
this are tied little pieces of brass and shells and other small
articles  but the head is not at all ornamented  the dress of the female
is indeed more modest  and more studiously so than any we have observed 
though the other sex is careless of the indelicacy of exposure 

the chopunnish have very few amusements  for their life is painful and
laborious  and all their exertions are necessary to earn even their
precarious subsistence  during the summer and autumn they are busily
occupied in fishing for salmon  and collecting their winter store of
roots  in the winter they hunt the deer on snow shoes over the plains 
and towards spring cross the mountains to the missouri for the purpose
of trafficking for buffaloe robes  the inconveniences of that
comfortless life are increased by frequent encounters with their enemies
from the west  who drive them over the mountains with the loss of their
horses  and sometimes the lives of many of the nation  though originally
the same people  their dialect varies very perceptibly from that of the
tushepaws  their treatment to us differed much from the kind and
disinterested services of the shoshonees  they are indeed selfish and
avaricious  they part very reluctantly with every article of food or
clothing  and while they expect a recompense for every service however
small  do not concern themselves about reciprocating any presents we may
give them 

they are generally healthy  the only disorders which we have had
occasion to remark being of a scrophulous kind  and for these  as well
as for the amusement of those who are in good health  hot and cold
bathing is very commonly used 

the soil of these prairies is of a light yellow clay intermixed with
small smooth grass  it is barren  and produces little more than a
bearded grass about three inches high  and a prickly pear  of which we
now found three species  the first is of the broad leafed kind  common
to the missouri  the second has the leaf of a globular form  and is also
frequent on the upper part of the missouri  particularly after it enters
the rocky mountains  the third is pecular to this country  and is much
more inconvenient than the other two  it consists of small thick leaves
of a circular form  which grow from the margin of each other as in the
broad leafed pear of the missouri  these leaves are armed with a greater
number of thorns  which are stronger  and appear to be barbed  and as
the leaf itself is very slightly attached to the stem  as soon as one
thorn touches the moccasin it adheres and brings with it the leaf  which
is accompanied by a reenforecement of thorns 


                             end of volume 1 






end of the project gutenberg ebook of history of the expedition under the
command of captains lewis and clark  vol  i   by meriwether lewis and william clark

    end of this project gutenberg ebook lewis and clark  i     

      this file should be named 16565 txt or 16565 zip      
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in 
        http   www gutenberg org 1 6 5 6 16565 

produced by the library of congress  marilynda
fraser cunliffe  peter barozzi and the online distributed
proofreading team at http   www pgdp net


updated editions will replace the previous one  the old editions
will be renamed 

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works  so the foundation
 and you   can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties   special rules 
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license  apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg tm concept and trademark   project
gutenberg is a registered trademark  and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks  unless you receive specific permission   if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook  complying with the
rules is very easy   you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works  reports  performances and
research   they may be modified and printed and given away  you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks   redistribution is
subject to the trademark license  especially commercial
redistribution 



    start  full license    

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works  by using or distributing this work
 or any other work associated in any way with the phrase  project
gutenberg    you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg tm license  available with this file or online at
http   gutenberg net license  


section 1   general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg tm
electronic works

1 a   by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg tm
electronic work  you indicate that you have read  understand  agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
 trademark copyright  agreement   if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement  you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in your possession 
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement  you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1 e 8 

1 b    project gutenberg  is a registered trademark   it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement   there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement   see
paragraph 1 c below   there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg tm electronic
works   see paragraph 1 e below 

1 c   the project gutenberg literary archive foundation   the foundation 
or pglaf   owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg tm electronic works   nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states   if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states  we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying  distributing  performing  displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed   of course  we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg tm name associated with
the work   you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg tm license when you share it without charge with others 

1 d   the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work   copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change   if you are outside the united states  check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading  copying  displaying  performing  distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg tm work   the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states 

1 e   unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg 

1 e 1   the following sentence  with active links to  or other immediate
access to  the full project gutenberg tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg tm work  any work on which the
phrase  project gutenberg  appears  or with which the phrase  project
gutenberg  is associated  is accessed  displayed  performed  viewed 
copied or distributed 

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever   you may copy it  give it away or
re use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www gutenberg net

1 e 2   if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain  does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder   the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges   if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase  project gutenberg  associated with or appearing on the
work  you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1 e 1
through 1 e 7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1 e 8 or
1 e 9 

1 e 3   if an individual project gutenberg tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder  your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1 e 1 through 1 e 7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder   additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work 

1 e 4   do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg tm
license terms from this work  or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg tm 

1 e 5   do not copy  display  perform  distribute or redistribute this
electronic work  or any part of this electronic work  without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1 e 1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg tm license 

1 e 6   you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary 
compressed  marked up  nonproprietary or proprietary form  including any
word processing or hypertext form   however  if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg tm work in a format other than
 plain vanilla ascii  or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg tm web site  www gutenberg net  
you must  at no additional cost  fee or expense to the user  provide a
copy  a means of exporting a copy  or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request  of the work in its original  plain vanilla ascii  or other
form   any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg tm
license as specified in paragraph 1 e 1 

1 e 7   do not charge a fee for access to  viewing  displaying 
performing  copying or distributing any project gutenberg tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1 e 8 or 1 e 9 

1 e 8   you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg tm electronic works provided
that

  you pay a royalty fee of 20  of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes   the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark  but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation   royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare  or are legally required to prepare  your periodic tax
     returns   royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4   information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation  

  you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing  or by e mail  within 30 days of receipt that s he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg tm
     license   you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg tm works 

  you provide  in accordance with paragraph 1 f 3  a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy  if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work 

  you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg tm works 

1 e 9   if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement  you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart  the owner of the project gutenberg tm trademark   contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below 

1 f 

1 f 1   project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify  do copyright research on  transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg tm
collection   despite these efforts  project gutenberg tm electronic
works  and the medium on which they may be stored  may contain
 defects   such as  but not limited to  incomplete  inaccurate or
corrupt data  transcription errors  a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement  a defective or damaged disk or other medium  a
computer virus  or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment 

1 f 2   limited warranty  disclaimer of damages   except for the  right
of replacement or refund  described in paragraph 1 f 3  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation  the owner of the project
gutenberg tm trademark  and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg tm electronic work under this agreement  disclaim all
liability to you for damages  costs and expenses  including legal
fees   you agree that you have no remedies for negligence  strict
liability  breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph f3   you agree that the foundation  the
trademark owner  and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual  direct  indirect  consequential  punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage 

1 f 3   limited right of replacement or refund   if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it  you can
receive a refund of the money  if any  you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from   if you
received the work on a physical medium  you must return the medium with
your written explanation   the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund   if you received the work electronically  the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund   if the second copy
is also defective  you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem 

1 f 4   except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1 f 3  this work is provided to you  as is  with no other
warranties of any kind  express or implied  including but not limited to
warranties of merchantibility or fitness for any purpose 

1 f 5   some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages 
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement  the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law   the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions 

1 f 6   indemnity   you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation  the
trademark owner  any agent or employee of the foundation  anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement  and any volunteers associated with the production 
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg tm electronic works 
harmless from all liability  costs and expenses  including legal fees 
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur   a  distribution of this or any project gutenberg tm
work   b  alteration  modification  or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg tm work  and  c  any defect you cause 


section  2   information about the mission of project gutenberg tm

project gutenberg tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete  old  middle aged and new computers   it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life 

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need  is critical to reaching project gutenberg tm s
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come   in 2001  the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg tm and future generations 
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help  see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation web page at http   www pglaf org 


section 3   information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501 c  3  educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service   the foundation s ein or federal tax identification
number is 64 6221541   its 501 c  3  letter is posted at
http   pglaf org fundraising   contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u s  federal laws and your state s laws 

the foundation s principal office is located at 4557 melan dr  s 
fairbanks  ak  99712   but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations   its business office is located at
809 north 1500 west  salt lake city  ut 84116   801  596 1887  email
business pglaf org   email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the foundation s web site and official
page at http   pglaf org

for additional contact information 
     dr  gregory b  newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby pglaf org


section 4   information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment   many small donations
  1 to  5 000  are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs 

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states   compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort  much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements   we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance   to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http   pglaf org

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements  we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate 

international donations are gratefully accepted  but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states   u s  laws alone swamp our small staff 

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses   donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks  online payments and credit card
donations   to donate  please visit  http   pglaf org donate


section 5   general information about project gutenberg tm electronic
works 

professor michael s  hart is the originator of the project gutenberg tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone   for thirty years  he produced and distributed project
gutenberg tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support 


project gutenberg tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions  all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u s 
unless a copyright notice is included   thus  we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition 


most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility 

     http   www gutenberg net

this web site includes information about project gutenberg tm 
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation  how to help produce our new ebooks  and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks 
